
--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
Contents
Title Page
Contents
Copyright
VALIS
Dedication
Epigraph
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Appendix
THE DIVINE INVASION
Epigraph
1
2
3
4
5
--- PAGE 4 ---
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
THE TRANSMIGRATION OF TIMOTHY ARCHER
Epigraph
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
--- PAGE 5 ---
Bibliography
About the Author
Footnotes
--- PAGE 6 ---
The Valis Trilogy
First Mariner Books edition 2011
All rights reserved
For information about permission to reproduce selections from this book,
write to trade.permissions@hmhco.com or to Permissions, Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company, 3 Park Avenue, 19th Floor, New
York, New York 10016.
www.hmhco.com
eISBN 978-0-547-86773-1
v3.0216
Valis
Copyright © 1981 by Philip K. Dick
Originally published by Bantam in 1981.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the print edition as follows:
Dick, Philip K.
Valis / Philip K. Dick.—1st Mariner Books ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-547-57241-3
I. Title.
PS3554.I3V35 2011
813'.54—dc22
2011016049
VALIS copyright © 1981 by Philip K. Dick. Excerpt from The Pre-
Socratics by Edward Hussey. Copyright © 1972 by Edward Hussey. By
permission of Charles Scribner’s Sons. Excerpt from The Introduction from
Lao Tzu: Tao Te Ching, translated by D. C. Lau. Copyright © 1963 by D. C.
Lau. By permission of Penguin Books Ltd. Excerpt from The Nag
Hammadi Library in English, “On the Origin of the World,” James
Robinson, General Editor; translated by Hans-Gebhard Bethge and Orval S.
--- PAGE 7 ---
Wintermute. Copyright © 1977 by E. J. Brill, Leiden, The Netherlands. By
permission of Harper & Row. Excerpt from Our Oriental Heritage by Will
Durant. Copyright 1935, © 1963 by Will Durant. By permission of Simon
& Schuster, a Division of Gulf and Western Corporation. Excerpt from A
Scanner Darkly by Philip K. Dick. Copyright © 1977 by Philip K. Dick. By
permission of Doubleday and Company, Inc. Excerpt from “Gnosticism”
from The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, by Hans Jonas; Paul Edwards, Editor
in Chief. Copyright © 1967 by Macmillan, Inc. By permission of the
publisher. Excerpts from “On Death and Its Relation to the Indestructibility
of Our True Nature” from The Will to Live: Selected Writings of Arthur
Schopenhauer, by Arthur Schopenhauer, edited by Richard Taylor.
Copyright © 1962 by Doubleday and Company, Inc. By permission of the
publisher. Excerpt from The New Encyclopaedia Britannica. Copyright ©
1980. By permission of the publisher. Excerpt from Protestantism by J.
Leslie Dunstan. Copyright © 1961 by J. Leslie Dunstan. By Permission of
George Braziller, Inc.
The Divine Invasion
Copyright © 1981 by Philip K. Dick
Originally published by Timescape, a division of Simon & Schuster, in
1981
The Library of Congress has cataloged the print edition as follows:
Dick, Philip K.
The divine invasion/Philip K. Dick.—1st Mariner Books ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-547-57242-0
I. Title.
PS3554.I3D5 2011
813'.54—dc22
2011015935
The Transmigration of Timothy Archer
Copyright © 1982 by Estate of Philip K. Dick
--- PAGE 8 ---
Originally published by Timescape, a division of Simon & Schuster, in
1982.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the print edition as follows:
Dick, Philip K.
The transmigration of Timothy Archer/Philip K. Dick.—
1st Mariner Books ed.
p. cm.
ISBN 978-0-547-57260-4
I. Title.
PS3554.I3T7 2011
813'.54—dc23
2011029336
--- PAGE 9 ---

--- PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---

--- PAGE 12 ---
To Russell Galen,
Who showed me the right way.
--- PAGE 13 ---
VALIS (acronym of Vast Active Living Intelligence System from an
American film): A perturbation in the reality field in which a
spontaneous self-monitoring negentropic vortex is formed, tending
progressively to subsume and incorporate its environment into
arrangements of information. Characterized by quasi-consciousness,
purpose, intelligence, growth and an armillary coherence.
—Great Soviet Dictionary, Sixth Edition, 1992
--- PAGE 14 ---

--- PAGE 15 ---
1
HORSELOVER FAT’S NERVOUS breakdown began the day he got the phone call
from Gloria asking if he had any Nembutals. He asked her why she wanted
them and she said that she intended to kill herself. She was calling everyone
she knew. By now she had fifty of them, but she needed thirty or forty more
to be on the safe side.
At once Horselover Fat leaped to the conclusion that this was her way of
asking for help. It had been Fat’s delusion for years that he could help
people. His psychiatrist once told him that to get well he would have to do
two things; get off dope (which he hadn’t done) and to stop trying to help
people (he still tried to help people).
As a matter of fact, he had no Nembutals. He had no sleeping pills of any
sort. He never did sleeping pills. He did uppers. So giving Gloria sleeping
pills by which she could kill herself was beyond his power. Anyhow, he
wouldn’t have done it if he could.
“I have ten,” he said. Because if he told her the truth she would hang up.
“Then I’ll drive up to your place,” Gloria said in a rational, calm voice,
the same tone in which she had asked for the pills.
He realized then that she was not asking for help. She was trying to die.
She was completely crazy. If she were sane she would realize that it was
necessary to veil her purpose, because this way she made him guilty of
complicity. For him to agree, he would need to want her dead. No motive
existed for him—or anyone—to want that. Gloria was gentle and civilized,
but she dropped a lot of acid. It was obvious that the acid, since he had last
heard from her six months ago, had wrecked her mind.
“What’ve you been doing?” Fat asked.
“I’ve been in Mount Zion Hospital in San Francisco. I tried suicide and
my mother committed me. They discharged me last week.”
“Are you cured?” he said.
“Yes,” she said.
That’s when Fat began to go nuts. At the time he didn’t know it, but he
had been drawn into an unspeakable psychological game. There was no way
out. Gloria Knudson had wrecked him, her friend, along with her own
--- PAGE 16 ---
brain. Probably she had wrecked six or seven other people, all friends who
loved her, along the way, with similar phone conversations. She had
undoubtedly destroyed her mother and father as well. Fat heard in her
rational tone the harp of nihilism, the twang of the void. He was not dealing
with a person; he had a reflex-arc thing at the other end of the phone line.
What he did not know then is that it is sometimes an appropriate response
to reality to go insane. To listen to Gloria rationally ask to die was to inhale
the contagion. It was a Chinese finger trap, where the harder you pull to get
out, the tighter the trap gets.
“Where are you now?” he asked.
“Modesto. At my parents’ home.”
Since he lived in Marin County, she was several hours’ drive away. Few
inducements would have gotten him to make such a drive. This was another
serving-up of lunacy: three hours’ drive each way for ten Nembutals. Why
not just total the car? Gloria was not even committing her irrational act
rationally. Thank you, Tim Leary, Fat thought. You and your promotion of
the joy of expanded consciousness through dope.
He did not know his own life was on the line. This was 1971. In 1972 he
would be up north in Vancouver, British Columbia, involved in trying to kill
himself, alone, poor and scared, in a foreign city. Right now he was spared
that knowledge. All he wanted to do was coax Gloria up to Marin County so
he could help her. One of God’s greatest mercies is that he keeps us
perpetually occluded. In 1976, totally crazy with grief, Horselover Fat
would slit his wrist (the Vancouver suicide attempt having failed), take
forty-nine tablets of high-grade digitalis, and sit in a closed garage with his
car motor running—and fail there, too. Well, the body has powers unknown
to the mind, Gloria’s mind had total control over her body; she was
rationally insane.
Most insanity can be identified with the bizarre and the theatrical. You
put a pan on your head and a towel around your waist, paint yourself purple
and go outdoors. Gloria was as calm as she had ever been; polite and
civilized. If she had lived in ancient Rome or Japan, she would have gone
unnoticed. Her driving skills probably remained unimpaired. She would
stop at every red light and not exceed the speed limit—on her trip to pick up
the ten Nembutals.
I am Horselover Fat, and I am writing this in the third person to gain
much-needed objectivity. I did not love Gloria Knudson, but I liked her. In
--- PAGE 17 ---
Berkeley, she and her husband had given elegant parties, and my wife and I
always got invited. Gloria spent hours fixing little sandwiches and served
different wines, and she dressed up and looked lovely, with her sandy-
colored short-cut curly hair.
Anyhow, Horselover Fat had no Nembutal to give her, and a week later
Gloria threw herself out of a tenth floor window of the Synanon Building in
Oakland, California, and smashed herself to bits on the pavement along
MacArthur Boulevard, and Horselover Fat continued his insidious, long
decline into misery and illness, the sort of chaos that astrophysicists say is
the fate in store for the whole universe. Fat was ahead of his time, ahead of
the universe. Eventually he forgot what event had started off his decline
into entropy; God mercifully occludes us to the past as well as the future.
For two months, after he learned of Gloria’s suicide, he cried and watched
TV and took more dope—his brain was going too, but he didn’t know it.
Infinite are the mercies of God.
As a matter of fact, Fat had lost his own wife, the year before, to mental
illness. It was like a plague. No one could discern how much was due to
drugs. This time in America—1960 to 1970—and this place, the Bay Area
of Northern California, was totally fucked. I’m sorry to tell you this, but
that’s the truth. Fancy terms and ornate theories cannot cover this fact up.
The authorities became as psychotic as those they hunted. They wanted to
put all persons who were not clones of the establishment away. The
authorities were filled with hate. Fat had seen police glower at him with the
ferocity of dogs. The day they moved Angela Davis, the black Marxist, out
of the Marin County jail, the authorities dismantled the whole civic center.
This was to baffle radicals who might intend trouble. The elevators got
unwired; doors got relabeled with spurious information; the district attorney
hid. Fat saw all this. He had gone to the civic center that day to return a
library book. At the electronic hoop at the civic center entrance, two cops
had ripped open the book and papers that Fat carried. He was perplexed.
The whole day perplexed him. In the cafeteria, an armed cop watched
everyone eat. Fat returned home by cab, afraid of his own car and
wondering if he was nuts. He was, but so was everyone else.
I am by profession, a science fiction writer. I deal in fantasies. My life is
a fantasy. Nonetheless, Gloria Knudson lies in a box in Modesto, California.
There’s a photo of her funeral wreaths in my photo album. It’s a color photo
so you can see how lovely the wreaths are. In the background a VW is
--- PAGE 18 ---
parked. I can be seen crawling into the VW, in the midst of the service. I am
not able to take any more.
After the graveside service Gloria’s former husband Bob and I and some
tearful friend of his—and hers—had a late lunch at a fancy restaurant in
Modesto near the cemetery. The waitress seated us in the rear because the
three of us looked like hippies even though we had suits and ties on. We
didn’t give a shit. I don’t remember what we talked about. The night before,
Bob and I—I mean, Bob and Horselover Fat—drove to Oakland to see the
movie Patton. Just before the graveside service Fat met Gloria’s parents for
the first time. Like their deceased daughter, they treated him with utmost
civility. A number of Gloria’s friends stood around the corny California
ranch-style living room recalling the person who linked them together.
Naturally, Mrs. Knudson wore too much makeup; women always put on too
much makeup when someone dies. Fat petted the dead girl’s cat, Chairman
Mao. He remembered the few days Gloria had spent with him upon her
futile trip to his house for the Nembutal which he did not have. She greeted
the disclosure of his lie with aplomb, even a neutrality. When you are going
to die you do not care about small things.
“I took them,” Fat had told her, lie upon lie.
They decided to drive to the beach, the great ocean beach of the Point
Reyes Peninsula. In Gloria’s VW, with Gloria driving (it never entered his
mind that she might, on impulse, wipe out him, herself and the car) and, an
hour later, sat together on the sand smoking dope.
What Fat wanted to know most of all was why she intended to kill
herself.
Gloria had on many-times-washed-jeans and a T-shirt with Mick Jagger’s
leering face across the front of it. Because the sand felt nice she took off her
shoes. Fat noticed that she had pink-painted toenails and that they were
perfectly pedicured. To himself he thought, she died as she lived.
“They stole my bank account,” Gloria said.
After a time he realized, from her measured, lucidly stated narration, that
no “they” existed. Gloria unfolded a panorama of total and relentless
madness, lapidary in construction. She had filled in all the details with tools
as precise as dental tools. No vacuum existed anywhere in her account. He
could find no error, except of course for the premise, which was that
everyone hated her, was out to get her, and she was worthless in every
respect. As she talked she began to disappear. He watched her go; it was
--- PAGE 19 ---
amazing. Gloria, in her measured way, talked herself out of existence word
by word. It was rationality at the service of—well, he thought, at the service
of nonbeing. Her mind had become one great, expert eraser. All that really
remained now was her husk; which is to say, her uninhabited corpse.
She is dead now, he realized that day on the beach.
After they had smoked up all their dope, they walked along and
commented on seaweed and the height of waves. Seagulls croaked by
overhead, sailing themselves like frisbies. A few people sat or walked here
and there, but mostly the beach was deserted. Signs warned of undertow.
Fat, for the life of him, could not figure out why Gloria didn’t simply walk
out into the surf. He simply could not get into her head. All she could think
of was the Nembutal she still needed, or imagined she needed.
“My favourite Dead album is Workingman’s Dead,” Gloria said at one
point. “But I don’t think they should advocate taking cocaine. A lot of kids
listen to rock.”
“They don’t advocate it. The song’s just about someone taking it. And it
killed him, indirectly; he smashed up his train.”
“But that’s why I started on drugs,” Gloria said.
“Because of the Grateful Dead?”
“Because,” Gloria said, “everyone wanted me to do it. I’m tired of doing
what other people want me to do.”
“Don’t kill yourself,” Fat said. “Move in with me. I’m all alone. I really
like you. Try it for a while, at least. We’ll move your stuff up, me and my
friends. There’s lots of things we can do, like go places, like to the beach
today. Isn’t it nice here?”
To that, Gloria said nothing.
“It would really make me feel terrible,” Fat said. “For the rest of my life,
if you did away with yourself.” Thereby, as he later realized, he presented
her with all the wrong reasons for living. She would be doing it as a favor to
others. He could not have found a worse reason to give had he looked for
years. Better to back the VW over her. This is why suicide hotlines are not
manned by nitwits; Fat learned this later in Vancouver, when, suicidal
himself, he phoned the British Columbia Crisis Center and got expert
advice. There was no correlation between this and what he told Gloria on
the beach that day.
Pausing to rub a small stone loose from her foot, Gloria said, “I’d like to
stay overnight at your place tonight.”
--- PAGE 20 ---
Hearing this, Fat experienced involuntary visions of sex.
“Far out,” he said, which was the way he talked in those days. The
counterculture possessed a whole book of phrases which bordered on
meaning nothing. Fat used to string a bunch of them together. He did so
now, deluded by his own carnality into imagining that he had saved his
friend’s life. His judgment, which wasn’t worth much anyhow, dropped to a
new nadir of acuity. The existence of a good person hung in the balance,
hung in a balance which Fat held, and all he could think of now was the
prospect of scoring. “I can dig it,” he prattled away as they walked. “Out of
sight.”
A few days later she was dead. They spent that night together, sleeping
fully dressed; they did not make love; the next afternoon Gloria drove off,
ostensibly to get her stuff from her parents’ house in Modesto. He never
saw her again. For several days he waited for her to show up and then one
night the phone rang and it was her ex-husband Bob.
“Where are you right now?” Bob asked.
The question bewildered him; he was at home, where his phone was, in
the kitchen, Bob sounded calm. “I’m here,” Fat said.
“Gloria killed herself today,” Bob said.
I have a photo of Gloria holding Chairman Mao in her arms; Gloria is
kneeling and smiling and her eyes shine. Chairman Mao is trying to get
down. To their left, part of a Christmas tree can be seen. On the back, Mrs.
Knudson has written in tidy letters:
How we made her feel gratitude for our love.
I’ve never been able to fathom whether Mrs. Knudson wrote that after
Gloria’s death or before. The Knudsons mailed me the photo a month—
mailed Horselover Fat the photo a month—after Gloria’s funeral. Fat had
written asking for a photo of her. Initially he had asked Bob, who replied in
a savage tone, “What do you want a picture of Gloria for?” To which Fat
could give no answer. When Fat got me started writing this, he asked me
why I thought Bob Langley got so mad at this request. I don’t know. I don’t
care. Maybe Bob knew that Gloria and Fat had spent a night together and he
was jealous. Fat used to say Bob Langley was a schizoid; he claimed that
Bob himself told him that. A schizoid lacks proper affect to go with his
--- PAGE 21 ---
thinking; he’s got what’s called “flattening of affect.” A schizoid would see
no reason not to tell you that about himself. On the other hand, Bob bent
down after the graveside service and put a rose on Gloria’s coffin. That was
about when Fat had gone crawling off to the VW. Which reaction is more
appropriate? Fat weeping in the parked car by himself, or the ex-husband
bending down with the rose, saying nothing, showing nothing, but doing
something . . . Fat contributed nothing to the funeral except a bundle of
flowers which he had belatedly bought on the trip down to Modesto. He had
given them to Mrs. Knudson, who remarked that they were lovely. Bob had
picked them out.
After the funeral, at the fancy restaurant where the waitress had moved
the three of them out of view, Fat asked Bob what Gloria had been doing at
Synanon, since she was supposed to be getting her possessions together and
driving back up to Marin County to live with him—he had thought.
“Carmina talked her into going to Synanon,” Bob said. That was Mrs.
Knudson. “Because of her history of drug involvement.”
Timothy, the friend Fat didn’t know, said, “They sure didn’t help her very
much.”
What had happened was that Gloria walked in the front door of Synanon
and they had gamed her right off. Someone, on purpose, had walked past
her as she sat waiting to be interviewed and had remarked on how ugly she
was. The next person to parade past her informed her that her hair looked
like something a rat slept in. Gloria had always been sensitive about her
curly hair. She wished it was long like all the other hair in the world. What
the third Synanon member would have said was moot, because by then
Gloria had gone upstairs to the tenth floor.
“Is that how Synanon works?” Fat asked.
Bob said, “It’s a technique to break down the personality. It’s a fascist
therapy that makes the person totally outer-directed and dependent on the
group. Then they can build up a new personality that isn’t drug-oriented.”
“Didn’t they realize she was suicidal?” Timothy asked.
“Of course,” Bob said. “She phoned in and talked to them; they knew her
name and why she was there.”
“Did you talk to them after her death?” Fat asked.
Bob said, “I phoned them up and asked to talk to someone high up and
told him they had killed my wife, and the man said that they wanted me to
--- PAGE 22 ---
come down there and teach them how to handle suicidal people. He was
super upset. I felt sorry for him.”
At that, hearing that, Fat decided that Bob himself was not right in the
head. Bob felt sorry for Synanon. Bob was all fucked up. Everyone was
fucked up, including Carmina Knudson. There wasn’t a sane person left in
Northern California. It was time to move somewhere else. He sat eating his
salad and wondering where he could go. Out of the country. Flee to Canada,
like the draft protesters. He personally knew ten guys who had slipped
across into Canada rather than fight in Vietnam. Probably in Vancouver he
would run into half a dozen people he knew. Vancouver was supposed to be
one of the most beautiful cities in the world. Like San Francisco, it was a
major port. He could start life all over and forget the past.
It entered his head as he sat fooling with his salad that when Bob phoned
he hadn’t said, “Gloria killed herself” but rather “Gloria killed herself
today,” as if it had been inevitable that she would do it one day or another.
Perhaps this had done it, this assumption. Gloria had been timed, as if she
were taking a math test. Who really was the insane one? Gloria or himself
(probably himself) or her ex-husband or all of them, the Bay Area, not
insane in the loose sense of the term but in the strict technical sense? Let it
be said that one of the first symptoms of psychosis is that the person feels
perhaps he is becoming psychotic. It is another Chinese finger trap. You
cannot think about it without becoming part of it. By thinking about
madness, Horselover Fat slipped by degrees into madness.
I wish I could have helped him.
--- PAGE 23 ---

--- PAGE 24 ---
2
ALTHOUGH THERE WAS nothing I could do to help Horselover Fat, he did
escape death. The first thing that came along to save him took the form of
an eighteen-year-old high school girl living down the street from him and
the second was God. Of the two of them the girl did better.
I’m not sure God did anything at all for him; in fact in some ways God
made him sicker. This was a subject on which Fat and I could not agree. Fat
was certain that God had healed him completely. That is not possible. There
is a line in the I Ching reading, “Always ill but never dies.” That fits my
friend.
Stephanie entered Fat’s life as a dope dealer. After Gloria’s death he did
so much dope that he had to buy from every source available to him.
Buying dope from high school kids is not a smart move. It has nothing to do
with dope itself but with the law and morality. Once you begin to buy dope
from kids you are a marked man. I’m sure it’s obvious why. But the thing I
knew—which the authorities did not—is this: Horselover Fat really wasn’t
interested in the dope that Stephanie had for sale. She dealt hash and grass
but never uppers. She did not approve of uppers. Stephanie never sold
anything she did not approve of. She never sold psychedelics no matter
what pressure was put on her. Now and then she sold cocaine. Nobody
could quite figure out her reasoning, but it was a form of reasoning. In the
normal sense, Stephanie did not think at all. But she did arrive at decisions,
and once she arrived at them no one could budge her. Fat liked her.
There lay the gist of it; he liked her and not the dope, but to maintain a
relationship with her he had to be a buyer, which meant he had to do hash.
For Stephanie, hash was the beginning and end of life—life worth living,
anyhow.
If God came in a poor second, at least he wasn’t doing anything illegal,
as Stephanie was. Fat was convinced that Stephanie would wind up in jail;
he expected her to be arrested any day. All Fat’s friends expected him to be
arrested any day. We worried about that and about his slow decline into
depression and psychosis and isolation. Fat worried about Stephanie.
Stephanie worried about the price of hash. More so, she worried about the
--- PAGE 25 ---
price of cocaine. We used to imagine her suddenly sitting bolt upright in the
middle of the night and exclaiming, “Coke has gone up to a hundred dollars
a gram!” She worried about the price of dope the way normal women worry
about the price of coffee.
We used to argue that Stephanie could not have existed before the Sixties.
Dope had brought her into being, summoned her out of the very ground.
She was a coefficient of dope, part of an equation. And yet it was through
her that Fat made his way eventually to God. Not through her dope; it has
nothing to do with dope. There is no door to God through dope; that is a lie
peddled by the unscrupulous. The means by which Stephanie brought
Horselover Fat to God was by means of a little clay pot which she threw on
her kickwheel, a kickwheel which Fat had helped pay for, as a present on
her eighteenth birthday. When he fled to Canada he took the pot with him,
wrapped up in shorts, socks and shirts, in his single suitcase.
It looked like an ordinary pot: squat and light brown, with a small
amount of blue glaze as trim. Stephanie was not an expert potter. This pot
was one of the first she threw, at least outside of her ceramics class in high
school. Naturally, one of her first pots would go to Fat. She and he had a
close relationship. When he’d get upset, Stephanie would quiet him down
by supercharging him with her hashpipe. The pot was unusual in one way,
however. In it slumbered God. He slumbered in the pot for a long time, for
almost too long. There is a theory among some religions that God
intervenes at the eleventh hour. Maybe that is so; I couldn’t say. In
Horselover Fat’s case God waited until three minutes before twelve, and
even then what he did was barely enough: barely enough and virtually too
late. You can’t hold Stephanie responsible for that; she threw the pot, glazed
it and fired it as soon as she had the kickwheel. She did her best to help her
friend Fat, who, like Gloria before him, was beginning to die. She helped
her friend the way Fat had tried to help his friend, only Stephanie did a
better job. But that was the difference between her and Fat. In a crisis she
knew what to do. Fat did not. Therefore Fat is alive today and Gloria is not.
Fat had a better friend than Gloria had had. Perhaps he would have wanted
it the other way around but the option was not his. We do not serve up
people to ourselves; the universe does. The universe makes certain
decisions and on the basis of these decisions some people live and some
people die. This is a harsh law. But every creature yields to it out of
--- PAGE 26 ---
necessity. Fat got God, and Gloria Knudson got death. It is unfair and Fat
would be the first person to say so. Give him credit for that.
After he had encountered God, Fat developed a love for him which was
not normal. It is not what is usually meant in saying that someone “loves
God.” With Fat it was an actual hunger. And stranger still, he explained to
us that God had injured him and still he yearned for him, like a drunk
yearns for booze. God, he told us, had fired a beam of pink light directly at
him, at his head, his eyes; Fat had been temporarily blinded and his head
had ached for days. It was easy, he said, to describe the beam of pink light;
it’s exactly what you get as a phosphene after-image when a flashbulb has
gone off in your face. Fat was spiritually haunted by that color. Sometimes
it showed up on a TV screen. He lived for that light, that one particular
color.
However, he could never really find it again. Nothing could generate that
color for light but God. In other words, normal light did not contain that
color. One time Fat studied a color chart, a chart of the visible spectrum.
The color was absent. He had seen a color which no one can see; it lay off
the end.
What comes after light in terms of frequency? Heat? Radio waves? I
should know but I don’t. Fat told me (I don’t know how true this is) that in
the solar spectrum what he saw was above seven hundred millimicrons; in
terms of Fraunhofer Lines, past B in the direction of A. Make of that what
you will. I deem it a symptom of Fat’s breakdown. People suffering nervous
breakdowns often do a lot of research, to find explanations for what they
are undergoing. The research, of course, fails.
It fails as far as we are concerned, but the unhappy fact is that it
sometimes provides a spurious rationalization to the disintegrating mind—
like Gloria’s “they.” I looked up the Fraunhofer Lines one time, and there is
no “A.” The earliest letter-indication that I could find is B. It goes from G
to B, from ultraviolet to infrared. That’s it. There is no more. What Fat saw,
or thought he saw, was not light.
After he returned from Canada—after he got God—Fat and I spent a lot
of time together, and in the course of our going out at night, a regular event
with us, cruising for action, seeing what was happening, we one time were
in the process of parking my car when all at once a spot of pink light
showed up on my left arm. I knew what it was, although I had never seen
such a thing before; someone had turned a laser beam on us.
--- PAGE 27 ---
“That’s a laser,” I said to Fat, who had seen it, too, since the spot was
moving all around, onto telephone poles and the cement wall of the garage.
Two teenagers stood at the far end of the street holding a square object
between them.
“They built the goddam thing,” I said.
The kids walked up to us, grinning. They had built it, they told us, from a
kit. We told them how impressed we were, and they walked off to spook
someone else.
“That color pink?” I asked Fat.
He said nothing. But I had the impression that he was not being up front
with me. I had the feeling that I had seen his color. Why he would not say
so, if such it was, I do not know. Maybe the notion spoiled a more elegant
theory. The mentally disturbed do not employ the Principle of Scientific
Parsimony: the most simple theory to explain a given set of facts. They
shoot for the baroque.
The cardinal point which Fat had made to us regarding his experience
with the pink beam which had injured and blinded him was this: he claimed
that instantly—as soon as the beam struck him—he knew things he had
never known. He knew, specifically, that his five-year-old son had an
undiagnosed birth defect and he knew what that birth defect consisted of,
down to the anatomical details. Down, in fact, to the medical specifics to
relate to the doctor.
I wanted to see how he told it to the doctor. How he explained knowing
the medical details. His brain had trapped all the information the beam of
pink light had nailed him with, but how would he account for it?
Fat later developed a theory that the universe is made out of information.
He started keeping a journal—had been, in fact, secretly doing so for some
time: the furtive act of a deranged person. His encounter with God was all
there on the pages in his—Fat’s, not God’s—handwriting.
The term “journal” is mine, not Fat’s. His term was “exegesis,” a
theological term meaning a piece of writing that explains or interprets a
portion of scripture. Fat believed that the information fired at him and
progressively crammed into his head in successive waves had a holy origin
and hence should be regarded as a form of scripture, even if it just applied
to his son’s undiagnosed right inguinal hernia which had popped the
hydrocele and gone down into the scrotal sack. This was the news Fat had
for the doctor. The news turned out to be correct, as was confirmed when
--- PAGE 28 ---
Fat’s ex-wife took Christopher in to be examined. Surgery was scheduled
for the next day, which is to say as soon as possible. The surgeon cheerfully
informed Fat and his ex-wife that Christopher’s life had been in danger for
years. He could have died during the night from a strangulated piece of his
own gut. It was fortunate, the surgeon said, that they had found out about it.
Thus again Gloria’s “they,” except that in this instance the “they” actually
existed.
The surgery came off a success, and Christopher stopped being such a
complaining child. He had been in pain since birth. After that, Fat and his
ex-wife took their son to another GP, one who had eyes.
One of the paragraphs in Fat’s journal impressed me enough to copy it
out and include it here. It does not deal with right inguinal hernias but is
more general in nature, expressing Fat’s growing opinion that the nature of
the universe is information. He had begun to believe this because for him
the universe—his universe—was indeed fast turning into information. Once
God started talking to him he never seemed to stop. I don’t think they report
that in the Bible.
Journal entry 37. Thoughts of the Brain are experienced by us as
arrangements and rearrangements—change—in a physical universe;
but in fact it is really information and information-processing which we
substantialize. We do not merely see its thoughts as objects, but rather
as the movement, or, more precisely, the placement of objects: how they
become linked to one another. But we cannot read the patterns of
arrangement; we cannot extract the information in it—i.e. it as
information, which is what it is. The linking and relinking of objects by
the Brain is actually a language, but not a language like ours (since it is
addressing itself and not someone or something outside itself).
Fat kept working this particular theme over and over again, both in this
journal and in his oral discourse to his friends. He felt sure the universe had
begun to talk to him. Another entry in his journal reads:
36. We should be able to hear this information, or rather narrative,
as a neutral voice inside us. But something has gone wrong. All creation
is a language and nothing but a language, which for some inexplicable
reason we can’t read outside and can’t hear inside. So I say, we have
become idiots. Something has happened to our intelligence. My
reasoning is this: arrangement of parts of the Brain is a language. We
are parts of the Brain; therefore we are language. Why, then, do we not
--- PAGE 29 ---
know this? We do not even know what we are, let alone what the outer
reality is of which we are parts. The origin of the word “idiot” is the
word “private.” Each of us has become private, and no longer shares
the common thought of the Brain, except at a subliminal level. Thus
our real life and purpose are conducted below our threshold of
consciousness.
To which I personally am tempted to say, Speak for yourself, Fat.
Over a long period of time (or “Deserts of vast Eternity,” as he would
have put it) Fat developed a lot of unusual theories to account for his
contact with God, and the information derived therefrom. One in particular
struck me as interesting, being different from the others. It amounted to a
kind of mental capitulation by Fat to what he was undergoing. This theory
held that in actuality he wasn’t experiencing anything at all. Sites of his
brain were being selectively stimulated by tight energy beams emanating
from far off, perhaps millions of miles away. These selective brain-site
stimulations generated in his head the impression—for him—that he was in
fact seeing and hearing words, pictures, figures of people, printed pages, in
short God and God’s Message, or, as Fat liked to call it, the Logos. But (this
particular theory held) he really only imagined he experienced these things.
They resembled holograms. What struck me was the oddity of a lunatic
discounting his hallucinations in this sophisticated manner; Fat had
intellectually dealt himself out of the game of madness while still enjoying
its sights and sounds. In effect, he no longer claimed that what he
experienced was actually there. Did this indicate he had begun to get better?
Hardly. Now he held the view that “they” or God or someone owned a long-
range very tight information-rich beam of energy focussed on Fat’s head. In
this I saw no improvement, but it did represent a change. Fat could now
honestly discount his hallucinations, which meant he recognized them as
such. But, like Gloria, he now had a “they.” It seemed to me a Pyrrhic
victory. Fat’s life struck me as a litany of exactly that, as, for example, the
way he had rescued Gloria.
The exegesis Fat labored on month after month struck me as a Pyrrhic
victory if there ever was one—in this case an attempt by a beleaguered
mind to make sense out of the inscrutable. Perhaps this is the bottom line to
mental illness: incomprehensible events occur; your life becomes a bin for
hoax-like fluctuations of what used to be reality. And not only that—as if
that weren’t enough—but you, like Fat, ponder forever over these
--- PAGE 30 ---
fluctuations in an effort to order them into a coherency, when in fact the
only sense they make is the sense you impose on them, out of the necessity
to restore everything into shapes and processes you can recognize. The first
thing to depart in mental illness is the familiar. And what takes its place is
bad news because not only can you not understand it, you also cannot
communicate it to other people. The madman experiences something, but
what it is or where it comes from he does not know.
In the midst of his shattered landscape, which one can trace back to
Gloria Knudson’s death, Fat imagined God had cured him. Once you notice
Pyrrhic victories they seem to abound.
It reminds me of a girl I once knew who was dying of cancer. I visited
her in the hospital and did not recognize her; sitting up in her bed she
looked like a little old hairless man. From the chemotherapy she had
swollen up like a great grape. From the cancer and the therapy she had
become virtually blind, nearly-deaf, underwent constant seizures, and when
I bent close to her to ask her how she felt she answered, when she could
understand my question, “I feel that God is healing me.” She had been
religiously inclined and had planned to go into a religious order. On the
metal stand beside her bed she had, or someone had, laid out her rosary. In
my opinion a FUCK YOU, GOD sign would have been appropriate; the rosary
was not.
Yet in all fairness, I have to admit that God—or someone calling himself
God, a distinction of mere semantics—had fired precious information at
Horselover Fat’s head by which their son Christopher’s life had been saved.
Some people God cures and some he slays. Fat denies that God slays
anyone. Fat says, God never harms anyone. Illness, pain and undeserved
suffering arise not from God but from elsewhere, to which I say, How did
this elsewhere arise? Are there two gods? Or is part of the universe out from
under God’s control? Fat used to quote Plato. In Plato’s cosmology, noös or
Mind is persuading ananke or blind necessity—or blind chance, according
to some experts—into submission. Noös happened to come along and to its
surprise discovered blind chance: chaos, in other words, onto which noös
imposes order (although how this “persuading” is done Plato nowhere
says). According to Fat, my friend’s cancer consisted of disorder not yet
persuaded into sentient shape. Noös or God had not yet gotten around to
her, to which I said, “Well, when he did get around to her it was too late.”
Fat had no answer for that, at least in terms of oral rebuttal. Probably he
--- PAGE 31 ---
sneaked off and wrote about it in his journal. He stayed up to four A.M.
every night scratching away in his journal. I suppose all the secrets of the
universe lay in it somewhere amid the rubble.
We enjoyed baiting Fat into theological disputation because he always
got angry, taking the point of view that what we said on the topic mattered
—that the topic itself mattered. By now he had become totally whacked out.
We enjoyed introducing the discussion by way of some careless comment:
“Well, God gave me a ticket on the freeway today” or something like that.
Ensnared, Fat would leap into action. We whiled away the time pleasantly
in this fashion, torturing Fat in a benign way. After we left his place we had
the added satisfaction of knowing he was writing it all down in the journal.
Of course, in the journal his view always prevailed.
No need existed to bait Fat with idle questions, such as, “If God can do
anything can he create a ditch so wide he can’t jump over it?” We had
plenty of real questions that Fat couldn’t field. Our friend Kevin always
began his attack one way. “What about my dead cat?” Kevin would ask.
Several years ago, Kevin had been out walking his cat in the early evening.
Kevin, the fool, had not put the cat on a leash, and the cat had dashed into
the street and right into the front wheel of a passing car. When he picked up
the remains of the cat it was still alive, breathing in bloody foam and staring
at him in horror. Kevin liked to say, “On judgment day when I’m brought
up before the great judge I’m going to say, ‘Hold on a second,’ and then I’m
going to whip out my dead cat from inside my coat. ‘How do you explain
this?’ I’m going to ask.” By then, Kevin used to say, the cat would be as
stiff as a frying pan; he would hold out the cat by its handle, its tail, and
wait for a satisfactory answer.
Fat said, “No answer would satisfy you.”
“No answer you could give,” Kevin sneered. “Okay, so God saved your
son’s life; why didn’t he have my cat run out into the street five seconds
later? Three seconds later? Would that have been too much trouble? Of
course, I suppose a cat doesn’t matter.”
“You know, Kevin,” I pointed out one time, “you could have put the cat
on a leash.”
“No,” Fat said. “He has a point. It’s been bothering me. For him the cat is
a symbol of everything about the universe he doesn’t understand.”
“I understand fine,” Kevin said bitterly. “I just think it’s fucked. God is
either powerless, stupid or he doesn’t give a shit. Or all three. He’s evil,
--- PAGE 32 ---
dumb, and weak. I think I’ll start my own exegesis.”
“But God doesn’t talk to you,” I said.
“You know who talks to Horse?” Kevin said. “Who really talks to Horse
in the middle of the night? People from the planet Stupid. Horse, what’s the
wisdom of God called again? Saint what?”
“Hagia Sophia,” Horse said cautiously.
Kevin said, “How do you say Hagia Stupid? St. Stupid?”
“Hagia Moron,” Horse said. He always defended himself by giving in.
“Moron is a Greek word like Hagia. I came across it when I was looking up
the spelling of oxymoron.”
“Except that the -on suffix is the neuter ending,” I said.
That gives you an idea of where our theological arguments tended to
wind up. Three malinformed people disagreeing with one another. We also
had David our Roman Catholic friend and the girl who had been dying of
cancer, Sherri. She had gone into remission and the hospital had discharged
her. To some extent her hearing and vision were permanently impaired, but
otherwise she seemed to be fine.
Fat, of course, used this as an argument for God and God’s healing love,
as did David and of course Sherri herself. Kevin saw her remission as a
miracle of radiation therapy and chemotherapy and luck. Also, he confided
to us, the remission was temporary. At any time, Sherri could get sick again.
Kevin hinted darkly that the next time she got sick there wouldn’t be a
remission. We sometimes thought that he hoped so, since it would confirm
his view of the universe.
It was a mainstay of Kevin’s bag of verbal tricks that the universe
consisted of misery and hostility and would get you in the end. He looked at
the universe the way most people regard an unpaid bill; eventually they will
force payment. The universe reeled you out, let you flop and thrash and
then reeled you in. Kevin waited constantly for this to begin with him, with
me, with David and especially with Sherri. As to Horselover Fat, Kevin
believed that the line hadn’t been payed out in years; Fat had long been in
the part of the cycle where they reel you back in. He considered Fat not just
potentially doomed but doomed in fact.
Fat had the good sense not to discuss Gloria Knudson and her death in
front of Kevin. Had he done so, Kevin would add her to his dead cat. He
would be talking about whipping her out from under his coat on judgment
day, along with the cat.
--- PAGE 33 ---
Being a Catholic, David always traced everything wrong back to man’s
free will. This used to annoy even me. I once asked him if Sherri getting
cancer consisted of an instance of free will, knowing as I did that David
kept up with all the latest news in the field of psychology and would make
the mistake of claiming that Sherri had subconsciously wanted to get cancer
and so had shut down her immune system, a view floating around in
advanced psychological circles at that time. Sure enough, David fell for it
and said so.
“Then why did she get well?” I asked. “Did she subconsciously want to
get well?”
David looked perplexed. If he consigned her illness to her own mind he
was stuck with having to consign her remission to mundane and not
supernatural causes. God had nothing to do with it.
“What C.S. Lewis would say,” David began, which at once angered Fat,
who was present. It maddened him when David turned to C.S. Lewis to
bolster his straight-down-the-pipe orthodoxy.
“Maybe Sherri overrode God,” I said. “God wanted her sick and she
fought to get well.” The thrust of David’s impending argument would of
course be that Sherri had neurotically gotten cancer due to being fucked up,
but God had stepped in and saved her; I had turned it around in anticipation.
“No,” Fat said. “It’s the other way around. Like when he cured me.”
Fortunately, Kevin was not present. He did not consider Fat cured (nor
did anyone else) and anyway God didn’t do it. That is a logic which Freud
attacks, by the way, the two-proposition self-cancelling structure. Freud
considered this structure a revelation of rationalization. Someone is accused
of stealing a horse, to which he replies, “I don’t steal horses and anyhow
you have a crummy horse.” If you ponder the reasoning in this you can see
the actual thought-process behind it. The second statement does not
reinforce the first. It only looks like it does. In terms of our perpetual
theological disputations—brought on by Fat’s supposed encounter with the
divine—the two-proposition self-cancelling structure would appear like
this:
1) God does not exist.
2) And anyhow he’s stupid.
--- PAGE 34 ---
A careful study of Kevin’s cynical rantings reveals this structure at every
turn. David continually quoted C.S. Lewis; Kevin contradicted himself
logically in his zeal to defame God; Fat made obscure references to
information fired into his head by a beam of pink light; Sherri, who had
suffered dreadfully, wheezed out pious mummeries: I switched my position
according to who I was talking to at the time. None of us had a grip on the
situation, but we did have a lot of free time to waste in this fashion. By now
the epoch of drug-taking had ended, and everyone had begun casting about
for a new obsession. For us the new obsession, thanks to Fat, was theology.
A favourite antique quotation of Fat’s goes:
“And can I think the great Jehovah sleeps,
Like Shemosh, and such fabled deities?
Ah! no; heav’n heard my thoughts, and wrote them down—
It must be so.”
Fat doesn’t like to quote the rest of it.
“’Tis this that racks my brain,
And pours into my breast a thousand pangs,
That lash me into madness . . .”
It’s from an aria by Handel. Fat and I used to listen to my Seraphim LP of
Richard Lewis singing it. Deeper, and deeper still.
Once I told Fat that another aria on the record described his mind
perfectly.
“Which aria?” Fat said guardedly.
“Total eclipse,” I answered.
“Total eclipse! no sun, no moon,
All dark amidst the blaze of noon!
Oh, glorious light! no cheering ray
To glad my eyes with welcome day!
Why thus deprived Thy prime decree?
Sun, moon and stars are dark to me!”
--- PAGE 35 ---
To which Fat said, “The opposite is true in my case. I am illuminated by
holy light fired at me from another world. I see what no other man sees.”
He had a point there.
--- PAGE 36 ---

--- PAGE 37 ---
3
A QUESTION WE HAD to learn to deal with during the dope decade was, How
do you break the news to someone that his brains are fried? This issue had
now passed over into Horselover Fat’s theological world as a problem for
us—his friends—to field.
It would have been simple to tie the two together in Fat’s case: the dope
he did during the Sixties had pickled his head on into the Seventies. If I
could have arranged it so that I could think so I would have; I like solutions
that answer a variety of problems simultaneously. But I really couldn’t think
so. Fat hadn’t done psychedelics, at least not to any real extent. Once, in
1964, when Sandox LSD-25 could still be acquired—especially in Berkeley
—Fat had dropped one huge hit of it and had abreacted back in time or had
shot forward in time or up outside of time; anyhow he had spoken in Latin
and believed that the Dies Irae, the Day of Wrath, had come. He could hear
God thumping tremendously, in fury. For eight hours Fat had prayed and
whined in Latin. Later he claimed that during his trip he could only think in
Latin and talk in Latin; he had found a book with a Latin quotation in it, and
could read it as easily as he normally read English. Well, perhaps the
etiology of his later God-madness lay there. His brain, in 1964, liked the
acid trip and taped it, for future replay.
On the other hand, this line of reasoning merely relegates the question
back to 1964. As far as I can determine, the ability to read, think and speak
in Latin is not normal for an acid trip. Fat knows no Latin. He can’t speak it
now. He couldn’t speak it before he dropped the huge hit of Sandoz LSD-
25. Later, when his religious experiences began, he found himself thinking
in a foreign language which he did not understand (he had understood his
own Latin in ’64). Phonetically, he had written down some of the words,
remembered at random. To him they constituted no language at all, and he
hesitated to show anyone what he had put on paper. His wife—his later wife
Beth—had taken a year of Greek in college and she recognized what Fat
had written down, inaccurately, as koine Greek. Or at least Greek of some
sort, Attic or koine.
--- PAGE 38 ---
The Greek word koine simply means common. By the time of the New
Testament, the koine had become the lingua franca of the Middle East,
replacing Aramaic which had previously supplanted Akkadian (I know
these things because I am a professional writer and it is essential that I
possess a scholarly knowledge about languages). The New Testament
manuscripts survived in koine Greek, although probably Q, the source of
the synoptics, had been written in Aramaic, which is in fact, a form of
Hebrew. Jesus spoke Aramaic. Thus, when Horselover Fat began to think in
koine Greek, he was thinking in the language which St. Luke and St. Paul—
who were close friends—had used, at least to write with. The koine looks
funny when written down because the scribes left no spaces between the
words. This can lead to a lot of peculiar translations, since the translator
gets to put the spaces wherever he feels is appropriate or in fact wherever
he wants. Take this English instance:
GOD IS NO WHERE
GOD IS NOW HERE
Actually, these matters were pointed out to me by Beth, who never took
Fat’s religious experiences seriously until she saw him write down
phonetically several words of the koine, which she knew he had no
experience with and could not recognize even as a genuine language. What
Fat claimed was—well, Fat claimed plenty. I must not start any sentence
with “What Fat claimed was.” During the years—outright years!—that he
labored on his exegesis, Fat must have come up with more theories than
there are stars in the universe. Every day he developed a new one, more
cunning, more exciting and more fucked. God, however, remained a
constant theme. Fat ventured away from belief in God the way a timid dog I
once owned had ventured off its front lawn. He—both of them—would go
first one step, then another, then perhaps a third and then turn tail and run
frantically back to familiar territory. God, to Fat, constituted a territory
which he had staked out. Unfortunately for him, following the initial
experience, Fat could not find his way back to that territory.
They ought to make it a binding clause that if you find God you get to
keep him. For Fat, finding God (if indeed he did find God) became,
ultimately, a bummer, a constantly diminishing supply of joy, sinking lower
and lower like the contents of a bag of uppers. Who deals God? Fat knew
--- PAGE 39 ---
that the churches couldn’t help, although he did consult with one of David’s
priests. It didn’t work. Nothing worked. Kevin suggested dope. Being
involved with literature, I recommended he read the English seventeenth
century minor metaphysical poets such as Vaughan and Herbert:
“He knows he hath a home, but scarce knows where,
He sayes it is so far
That he hath quite forgot how to go there.”
Which is from Vaughan’s poem “Man.” As nearly as I could make out,
Fat had devolved to the level of those poets, and had, for these times,
become an anachronism. The universe has a habit of deleting anachronisms.
I saw this coming for Fat if he didn’t get his shit together.
Of all the suggestions given to Fat, the one that seemed most promising
came from Sherri, who still lingered on with us in a state of remission.
“What you should do,” she told Fat during one of his darker hours, “is get
into studying the characteristics of the T-34.”
Fat asked what that was. It turned out that Sherri had read a book on
Russian armor during World War Two. The T-34 tank had been the Soviet
Union’s salvation and thereby the salvation of all the Allied Powers—and,
by extension, Horselover Fat’s, since without the T-34 he would be
speaking—not English or Latin or the koine—but German.
“The T-34,” Sherri explained, “moved very rapidly. At Kursk they
knocked out even Porsche Elefants. You have no idea what they did to the
Fourth Panzer Army.” She then started drawing sketches of the situation at
Kursk in 1943, giving figures. Fat and the rest of us were mystified. This
was a side of Sherri we hadn’t known. “It took Zhukov himself to turn the
tide against the Panzers,” Sherri wheezed on. “Vatutin screwed up. He was
later murdered by pro-Nazi partisans. Now, consider the Tiger tank the
Germans had and their Panthers.” She showed us photographs of various
tanks and related with relish how General Koniev had successfully crossed
the Dniester and Prut Rivers by March twenty-sixth.
Basically, Sherri’s idea had to do with bringing Fat’s mind down from the
cosmic and the abstract to the particular. She had hatched out the practical
notion that nothing is more real than a large World War Two Soviet tank.
She wanted to provide an antitoxin to Fat’s madness. However, her
recitation, complete with maps and photographs, only served to remind him
--- PAGE 40 ---
of the night he and Bob had seen the movie Patton before attending Gloria’s
graveside service. Naturally, Sherri had not known about that.
“I think he should take up sewing,” Kevin said. “Don’t you have a
sewing machine, Sherri? Teach him to use it.”
Sherri, showing a high degree of stubbornness, continued, “The tank
battles at Kursk involved over four thousand armored vehicles. It was the
greatest battle of armor in history. Everyone knows about Stalingrad, but
nobody knows about Kursk. The real victory by the Soviet Union took
place at Kursk. When you consider—”
“Kevin,” David interrupted, “what the Germans should have done was
show the Russians a dead cat and ask them to explain it.”
“That would have stopped the Soviet offensive right there,” I said.
“Zhukov would still be trying to account for the cat’s death.”
To Kevin, Sherri said, “In view of the stunning victory by the good side
at Kursk, how can you complain about one cat?”
“There’s something in the Bible about falling sparrows,” Kevin said.
“About his eye being on them. That’s what’s wrong with God; he only has
one eye.”
“Did God win the battle at Kursk?” I said to Sherri. “That must be news
to the Russians, especially the ones who built the tanks and drove them and
got killed.”
Sherri said patiently, “God uses us as instruments through which he
works.”
“Well,” Kevin said, “regarding Horse, God has a defective instrument. Or
maybe they’re both defective, like an eighty-year-old lady driving a Pinto
with a drop-in gas tank.”
“The Germans would have had to hold up Kevin’s dead cat,” Fat said.
“Not just any dead cat. All Kevin cares about is that one cat.”
“That cat,” Kevin said, “did not exist during World War Two.”
“Did you grieve over him then?” Fat said.
“How could I?” Kevin said. “He didn’t exist.”
“Then his condition was the same as now,” Fat said.
“Wrong,” Kevin said.
“Wrong in what way?” Fat said. “How did his nonexistence then differ
from his nonexistence now?”
“Kevin’s got the corpse now,” David said. “To hold up. That was the
whole point of the cat’s existence. He lived to become a corpse by which
--- PAGE 41 ---
Kevin could refute the goodness of God.”
“Kevin,” Fat said, “who created your cat?”
“God did,” Kevin said.
“So God created a refutation of his own goodness,” Sherri said. “By your
logic.”
“God is stupid,” Kevin said. “We have a stupid deity. I’ve said that
before.”
Sherri said, “Does it take much skill to create a cat?”
“You just need two cats,” Kevin said. “One male and one female.” But he
could obviously see where she was leading him. “It takes—” He paused,
grinning. “Okay, it takes skill, if you presume purpose in the universe.”
“You don’t see any purpose?” Sherri said.
Hesitating, Kevin said, “Living creatures have purpose.”
“Who puts the purpose in them?” Sherri said.
“They—” Again Kevin hesitated. “They are their purpose. They and their
purpose can’t be separated.”
“So an animal is an expression of purpose,” Sherri said. “So there is
purpose in the universe.”
“In small parts of it.”
“And unpurpose gives rise to purpose.”
Kevin eyed her. “Eat shit,” he said.
In my opinion, Kevin’s cynical stance had done more to ratify Fat’s
madness than any other single factor—any other, that is, than the original
cause, whatever that might have been. Kevin had become the unintentional
instrument of that original cause, a realization which had not escaped Fat.
In no way, shape or form did Kevin represent a viable alternative to mental
illness. His cynical grin had about it the grin of death; he grinned like a
triumphant skull. Kevin lived to defeat life. It originally amazed me that Fat
would put up with Kevin, but later I could see why. Every time Kevin tore
down Fat’s system of delusions—mocked them and lampooned them—Fat
gained strength. If mockery were the only antidote to his malady, he was
palpably better off as he stood. Whacked out as he was, Fat could see this.
Actually, were the truth known, Kevin could see it too. But he evidently had
a feedback loop in his head that caused him to step up the attacks rather
than abandon them. His failure reinforced his efforts. So the attacks grew
and Fat’s strength grew. It resembled a Greek myth.
--- PAGE 42 ---
In Horselover Fat’s exegesis the theme of this issue is put forth over and
over again. Fat believed that a streak of the irrational permeated the entire
universe, all the way up to God or the Ultimate Mind, which lay behind it.
He wrote:
38. From loss and grief the Mind has become deranged. Therefore
we, as parts of the universe, the Brain, are partly deranged.
Obviously he had extrapolated into cosmic proportions from his own loss
of Gloria.
35. The Mind is not talking to us but by means of us. Its narrative
passes through us and its sorrow infuses us irrationally. As Plato
discerned, there is a streak of the irrational in the World Soul.
Entry 32 gives more on this:
The changing information which we experience as World is an
unfolding narrative. It tells about the death of a woman (italics mine).
This woman, who died long ago, was one of the primordial twins. She
was one half of the divine syzygy. The purpose of the narrative is the
recollection of her and of her death. The Mind does not wish to forget
her. Thus the ratiocination of the Brain consists of a permanent record
of her existence, and, if read, will be understood this way. All the
information processed by the Brain—experienced by us as the
arranging and rearranging of physical objects—is an attempt at this
preservation of her; stones and rocks and sticks and amoebae are
traces of her. The record of her existence and passing is ordered onto
the meanest level of reality by the suffering Mind which is now alone.
If, in reading this, you cannot see that Fat is writing about himself, then
you understand nothing.
On the other hand, I am not denying that Fat was totally whacked out. He
began to decline when Gloria phoned him and he continued to decline
forever and ever. Unlike Sherri and her cancer. Fat experienced no
remission. Encountering God was not a remission. But probably it wasn’t a
worsening, despite Kevin’s cynical views. You cannot say that an encounter
with God is to mental illness what death is to cancer: the logical outcome of
a deteriorating illness process. The technical term—theological technical
term, not psychiatric—is theophany. A theophany consists of a self-
disclosure by the divine. It does not consist of something the percipient
does; it consists of something the divine—the God or gods, the high power
—does. Moses did not create the burning bush. Elijah, on Mount Horeb, did
--- PAGE 43 ---
not generate the low, murmuring voice. How are we to distinguish a
genuine theophany from a mere hallucination on the part of the percipient?
If the voice tells him something he does not know and could not know, then
perhaps we are dealing with the genuine thing and not the spurious. Fat
knew no koine Greek. Does this prove anything? He did not know about his
son’s birth defect—at least not consciously. Perhaps he knew about the
near-strangulated hernia unconsciously, and simply did not want to face it.
There exists, too, a mechanism by which he might have known the koine; it
has to do with phylogenic memory, the experience of which has been
reported by Jung: he terms it the collective or racial unconscious. The
ontogeny—that is, the individual—recapitulates the phylogeny—that is, the
species—and since this is generally accepted, then maybe here lies a basis
for Fat’s mind serving up a language spoken two thousand years ago. If
there were phylogenic memories buried in the individual human mind, this
is what you might expect to find. But Jung’s concept is speculative. No one,
really, has been able to verify it.
If you grant the possibility of a divine entity, you cannot deny it the
power of self-disclosure; obviously any entity or being worthy of the term
“god” would possess, without effort, that ability. The real question (as I see
it) is not, Why theophanies? but, Why aren’t there more? The key concept
to account for this is the idea of the deus absconditus, the hidden,
concealed, secret or unknown god. For some reason Jung regards this as a
notorious idea. But if God exists, he must be a deus absconditus—with the
exception of his rare theopanies, or else he does not exist at all. The latter
view makes more sense, except for the theophanies, rare though they be. All
that is required is one absolutely verified theophany and the latter view is
voided.
The vividness of the impression which a supposed theophany makes on
the percipient is no proof of authenticity. Nor, really, is group perception (as
Spinoza supposed, the entire universe may be one theophany, but then,
again, the universe may not exist at all, as the Buddhist idealists decided).
Any given alleged theophany may be a fake because anything may be a
fake, from stamps to fossil skulls to black holes in space.
That the entire universe—as we experience it—could be a forgery is an
idea best expressed by Heraclitus. Once you have taken his notion, or doubt
into your head, you are ready to deal with the issue of God.
--- PAGE 44 ---
“It is necessary to have understanding (noös) in order to be able to
interpret the evidence of eyes and ears. The step from the obvious to
the latent truth is like the translation of utterances in a language
which is foreign to most men. Heraclitus . . . in Fragment 56 says
that men, in regard to knowledge of perceptible things, ‘are the
victims of illusion much as Homer was.’ To reach the truth from the
appearances, it is necessary to interpret, to guess the riddle . . . but
though this seems to be within the capacity of men, it is something
most men never do. Heraclitus is very vehement in his attacks on
the foolishness of ordinary men, and of what passes for knowledge
among them. They are compared to sleepers in private worlds of
their own.”
Thus says Edward Hussey, Lecturer in Ancient Philosophy at the
University of Oxford and a Fellow of All Souls College, in his book The
Presocratics, published by Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, 1972, pages
37–38. In all my reading I have—I mean, Horselover Fat has—never found
anything more significant as an insight into the nature of reality. In
Fragment 123, Heraclitus says, “The nature of things is in the habit of
concealing itself.” And in Fragment 54 he says, “Latent structure is master
of obvious structure,” to which Edward Hussey adds, “Consequently, he
(Heraclitus) necessarily agreed . . . that reality was to some extent
‘hidden.’” So if reality “[is] to some extent ‘hidden,’” then what is meant by
“theophany”? Because a theophany is an in-breaking of God, an in-breaking
which amounts to an invasion of our world; and yet our world is only
seeming; it is only “obvious structure,” which is under the mastery of
unseen “latent structure.” Horselover Fat would like you to consider this
above all other things. Because if Heraclitus is correct, there is in fact no
reality but that of theophanies; the rest is illusion; in which case Fat alone
among us comprehends the truth, and Fat, starting with Gloria’s phone call,
is insane.
Insane people—psychologically defined, not legally defined—are not in
touch with reality. Horselover Fat is insane; therefore he is not in touch with
reality. Entry no. 30 from his exegesis:
The phenomenal world does not exist; it is a hypostasis of the
information processed by the Mind.
--- PAGE 45 ---
35. The Mind is not talking to us but by means of us. Its narrative
passes through us and its sorrow infuses us irrationally. As Plato
discerned, there is a streak of the irrational in the World Soul.
In other words, the universe itself—and the Mind behind it—is insane.
Therefore someone in touch with reality is, by definition, in touch with the
insane: infused by the irrational.
In essence, Fat monitored his own mind and found it defective. He then,
by the use of that mind, monitored outer reality, that which is called the
macrocosm. He found it defective as well. As the Hermetic philosophers
stipulated, the macrocosm and the microcosm mirror each other faithfully.
Fat, using a defective instrument, swept out a defective subject, and from
this sweep got back the report that everything was wrong.
And in addition, there was no way out. The interlocking between the
defective instrument and the defective subject produced another perfect
Chinese finger trap. Caught in his own maze, like Daedalus, who built the
labyrinth for King Minos of Crete and then fell into it and couldn’t get out.
Presumably Daedalus is still there, and so are we. The only difference
between us and Horselover Fat is that Fat knows his situation and we do
not; therefore Fat is insane and we are normal. “They are compared to
sleepers in private worlds of their own,” as Hussey put it, and he would
know; he is the foremost living authority on ancient Greek thought, with the
possible exception of Francis Cornford. And it is Cornford who says that
Plato believed that there was an element of the irrational in the World Soul.1
There is no route out of the maze. The maze shifts as you move through
it, because it is alive.
PARSIFAL: I move only a little, yet already I seem to have gone far.
GURNEMANZ: You see, my son, here time turns into space.
(The whole landscape becomes indistinct. A forest ebbs out and a wall of
rough rock ebbs in, through which can be seen a gateway. The two men
pass through the gateway. What happened to the forest? The two men did
not really move; they did not go anywhere, and yet they are not now where
they originally were. Here time turns into space. Wagner began Parsifal in
1845. He died in 1873, long before Hermann Minkowski postulated four-
dimensional space-time (1908). The source-basis for Parsifal consisted of
Celtic legends, and Wagner’s research into Buddhism for his never-written
--- PAGE 46 ---
opera about the Buddha to be called The Victors (Die Sieger). Where did
Richard Wagner get the notion that time could turn into space?)
And if time can turn into space, can space turn into time?
In Mircea Eliade’s book Myth and Reality one chapter is titled “Time Can
Be Overcome.” It is a basic purpose of mythic ritual and sacrament to
overcome time. Horselover Fat found himself thinking in a language used
two thousand years ago, the language in which St. Paul wrote. Here time
turns into space. Fat told me another feature of his encounter with God: all
of a sudden the landscape of California, USA, 1974 ebbed out and the
landscape of Rome of the first century C.E. ebbed in. He experienced a
superimposition of the two for a while, like techniques familiar in movies.
In photography. Why? How? God explained many things to Fat but he
never explained that, except for this cryptic statement: it is journal listing 3.
He causes things to look different so it would appear time has passed.
Who is “he”? Are we to infer that time has not in fact passed? And did it
ever pass? Was there once a real time, and for that matter a real world, and
now there is counterfeit time and a counterfeit world, like a sort of bubble
growing and looking different but actually static?
Horselover Fat saw fit to list this statement early in his journal or
exegesis or whatever he calls it. Journal listing 4, the next entry, goes:
Matter is plastic in the face of Mind.
Is any world but there at all? For all intents and purposes Gurnemanz and
Parsifal stand still, and the landscape changes; so they become located in
another space—a space which formerly had been experienced as time. Fat
thought in a language of two thousand years ago and saw the ancient world
appropriate to that language; the inner contents of his mind matched his
perceptions of the outer world. Some kind of logic seems involved, here.
Perhaps a time dysfunction took place. But why didn’t his wife Beth
experience it, too? She was living with him when he had his encounter with
the divine. For her nothing changed, except (as she told me) she heard
strange popping sounds, like something overloaded: objects pushed to the
point where they exploded, as if jammed, jammed with too much energy.
Both Fat and his wife told me another aspect of those days, in March
1974. Their pet animals underwent a peculiar metamorphosis. The animals
looked more intelligent and more peaceful. That is, until both animals died
of massive malignant tumors.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Both Fat and his wife told me one thing about their pets which has stuck
in my mind ever since. During that time the animals seemed to be trying to
communicate with them, trying to use language. That cannot be written off
as part of Fat’s psychosis—that, and the animals’ death.
The first thing that went wrong, according to Fat, had to do with the
radio. Listening to it one night—he had not been able to sleep for a long
time—he heard the radio saying hideous words, sentences which it could
not be saying. Beth, being asleep, missed that. So that could have been Fat’s
mind breaking down; by then his psyche was disintegrating at a terrible
velocity.
Mental illness is not funny.
--- PAGE 48 ---

--- PAGE 49 ---
4
FOLLOWING HIS SPECTACULAR suicide attempt with the pills, the razor sharp
blade and the car engine, all this due to Beth taking their son Christopher
and leaving him, Fat found himself locked up in the Orange County mental
hospital. An armed cop had pushed him in a wheelchair from the cardiac
intensive care ward through the underground corridor which connected with
the psychiatric wing.
Fat had never been locked up before. From the forty-nine tablets of
digitalis he had suffered several days of PAT arrhythmia, since his efforts
had yielded maximum dig toxicity, listed on the scale as Three. Digitalis
had been prescribed for him to counter an hereditary PAT arrhythmia, but
nothing such as he experienced while dig toxic. It’s ironic than an overdose
of digitalis induces the very arrhythmia it is used to counteract. At one
point, while Fat lay on his back gazing up at the cathode-tube screen over
his head, a straight line showed; his heart had stopped beating. He
continued to watch, and finally the trace dot resumed its wave-form. The
mercies of God are infinite.
So in a weakened condition he arrived under armed guard at the
psychiatric lock-up, where he soon found himself sitting in a corridor
breathing vast amounts of cigarette smoke and shaking, both from fatigue
and fear. That night he slept on a cot—six cots to a room—and discovered
that his cot came equipped with leather manacles. The door had been
propped open to the corridor so the psych techs could keep watch over the
patients. Fat could see the commercial TV set, which remained on. Johnny
Carson’s guest turned out to be Sammy Davis, Jr. Fat lay watching,
wondering how it felt to have one glass eye. At that point he had no insight
into his situation. He understood that he had survived the dig toxicity; he
understood that for all intents and purposes he was now under arrest for his
suicide attempt; he had no idea what Beth had been doing during the time
he lay in the cardiac intensive care ward. She had neither called nor come to
visit him. Sherri had come first, then David. No one else knew. Fat
particularly did not want Kevin to know because Kevin would show up and
--- PAGE 50 ---
be cynical at his—Fat’s—expense. And he wasn’t in any condition to
receive cynicism, even if it were well meant.
The chief cardiologist at the Orange County Medical Center had
exhibited Fat to a whole group of student doctors from U.C. Irvine. OCMC
was a teaching hospital. They all wanted to listen to a heart labouring under
forty-nine tabs of high-grade digitalis.
Also, he had lost blood from the slash on his left wrist. What had saved
his life initially emanated from a defect in the choke of his car; the choke
hadn’t opened properly as the engine warmed, and finally the engine had
stalled. Fat had made his way unsteadily back into the house and lain down
on his bed to die. The next morning he woke up, still alive, and had begun
to vomit up the digitalis. That was the second thing which saved him. The
third thing came in the form of all the paramedics in the world removing the
glass and aluminum sliding door at the rear of Fat’s house. Fat had phoned
his pharmacy somewhere along the line to get a refill on his Librium
prescription; he had taken thirty Librium just before taking the digitalis. The
pharmacist had contacted the paramedics. A lot can be said for the infinite
mercies of God, but the smarts of a good pharmacist, when you get down to
it, is worth more.
After one night in the receiving ward of the psychiatric wing of the
county medical hospital, Fat underwent his automatic evaluation. A whole
host of well-dressed men and women confronted him; each held a clipboard
and all of them scrutinized him intently.
Fat put on the trappings of sanity, as best he could. He did everything
possible to convince them that he had regained his senses. As he spoke he
realized that nobody believed him. He could have delivered his monolog in
Swahili with equal effect. All he managed to do was abase himself and
thereby divest himself of his last remnant of dignity. He had stripped away
his self-respect by his own earnest efforts. Another Chinese finger trap.
Fuck it, Fat said to himself finally, and ceased talking.
“Go outside,” one of the psych techs said, “and we’ll let you know our
decision.”
“I really have learned my lesson,” Fat said as he rose and started out of
the room. “Suicide represents the introjection of hostility which should
better be directed outward at the person who has frustrated you. I had a lot
of time to meditate during the intensive cardiac care unit or ward and I
realized that years of self-abnegation and denial manifested itself in my