
--- PAGE 50 ---
be cynical at his—Fat’s—expense. And he wasn’t in any condition to
receive cynicism, even if it were well meant.
The chief cardiologist at the Orange County Medical Center had
exhibited Fat to a whole group of student doctors from U.C. Irvine. OCMC
was a teaching hospital. They all wanted to listen to a heart labouring under
forty-nine tabs of high-grade digitalis.
Also, he had lost blood from the slash on his left wrist. What had saved
his life initially emanated from a defect in the choke of his car; the choke
hadn’t opened properly as the engine warmed, and finally the engine had
stalled. Fat had made his way unsteadily back into the house and lain down
on his bed to die. The next morning he woke up, still alive, and had begun
to vomit up the digitalis. That was the second thing which saved him. The
third thing came in the form of all the paramedics in the world removing the
glass and aluminum sliding door at the rear of Fat’s house. Fat had phoned
his pharmacy somewhere along the line to get a refill on his Librium
prescription; he had taken thirty Librium just before taking the digitalis. The
pharmacist had contacted the paramedics. A lot can be said for the infinite
mercies of God, but the smarts of a good pharmacist, when you get down to
it, is worth more.
After one night in the receiving ward of the psychiatric wing of the
county medical hospital, Fat underwent his automatic evaluation. A whole
host of well-dressed men and women confronted him; each held a clipboard
and all of them scrutinized him intently.
Fat put on the trappings of sanity, as best he could. He did everything
possible to convince them that he had regained his senses. As he spoke he
realized that nobody believed him. He could have delivered his monolog in
Swahili with equal effect. All he managed to do was abase himself and
thereby divest himself of his last remnant of dignity. He had stripped away
his self-respect by his own earnest efforts. Another Chinese finger trap.
Fuck it, Fat said to himself finally, and ceased talking.
“Go outside,” one of the psych techs said, “and we’ll let you know our
decision.”
“I really have learned my lesson,” Fat said as he rose and started out of
the room. “Suicide represents the introjection of hostility which should
better be directed outward at the person who has frustrated you. I had a lot
of time to meditate during the intensive cardiac care unit or ward and I
realized that years of self-abnegation and denial manifested itself in my
--- PAGE 51 ---
destructive act. But what amazed me the most was the wisdom of my body,
which knew not only to defend itself from my mind but specifically how to
defend itself. I realize now that Yeats’s statement, ‘I am an immortal soul
tied to the body of a dying animal’ is diametrically opposite to the actual
state of affairs vis-à-vis the human condition.”
The psych tech said, “We’ll talk to you outside after we’ve made our
decision.”
Fat said, “I miss my son.”
No one looked at him.
“I thought Beth might hurt Christopher,” Fat said. That was the only true
statement he had made since entering the room. He had tried to kill himself
not so much because Beth had left him but because with her living
elsewhere he could not look after his little son.
Presently, he sat outside in the corridor, on a plastic and chrome couch,
listening to a fat old woman tell how her husband had plotted to kill her by
pumping poison gas under the door of her bedroom. Fat thought back over
his life. He did not think about God, who he had seen. He did not say to
himself, I am one of the few human beings who has actually seen God.
Instead he thought back to Stephanie who had made him the little clay pot
which he called Oh Ho because it seemed like a Chinese pot to him. He
wondered if Stephanie had become a heroin addict by now or had been
locked up in jail, as he was now locked up, or was dead, or married, or
living in the snow in Washington like she had always talked about, the state
of Washington, which she had never seen but dreamed about. Maybe all of
those things or none of them. Maybe she had been crippled in an auto
accident. He wondered what Stephanie would say to him if she could see
him now, locked up, his wife and child gone, the choke on his car not
working, his mind fried.
Were his mind not fried he probably would have thought about how
lucky he was to be alive—not in the philosophical sense of lucky but in the
statistical sense. Nobody survives forty-nine tabs of high grade pure
digitalis. As a general rule, twice the prescribed dose of digitalis will off
you. Fat’s prescribed dose had been fixed at q.i.d.: four a day. He had
swallowed 12.25 times his prescribed daily dose and survived. The infinite
mercies of God make no sense whatsoever, in terms of practical
considerations. In addition he had downed all his Librium, twenty Quide
--- PAGE 52 ---
and sixty Apresoline, plus half a bottle of wine. All that remained of his
medication was a bottle of Miles Nervine. Fat was technically dead.
Spiritually, he was dead, too.
Either he had seen God too soon or he had seen him too late. In any case,
it had done him no good at all in terms of survival. Encountering the living
God had not helped to equip him for the tasks of ordinary endurance, which
ordinary men, not so favored, handle.
But it could also be pointed out—and Kevin had done so—that Fat had
accomplished something else in addition to seeing God. Kevin had phoned
him up one day in excitement, having in his possession another book by
Mircea Eliade.
“Listen!” Kevin said. “You know what Eliade says about the dream-time
of the Australian bushmen? He says that anthropologists are wrong in
assuming that the dream-time is time in the past. Eliade says that it’s
another kind of time going on right now, which the bushmen break through
and into, the age of the heroes and their deeds. Wait: I’ll read you the part.”
An interval of silence. “Fuck,” Kevin then said. “I can’t find it. But the way
they prepare for it is to undergo dreadful pain; it’s their ritual of initiation.
You were in a lot of pain when you had your experience; you had that
impacted wisdom tooth and you were—” On the phone Kevin lowered his
voice; he had been shouting. “You remember. Afraid about the authorities
getting you.”
“I was nuts,” Fat had answered. “They weren’t after me.”
“But you thought they were and you were so scared you fucking couldn’t
sleep at night, night after night. And you underwent sensory deprivation.”
“Well, I lay in bed unable to sleep.”
“You started seeing colors, Floating colors.” Kevin had begun to shout
again in excitement; when his cynicism vanished he became manic. “That’s
described in The Tibetan Book of the Dead; that’s the trip across to the next
world. You were mentally dying! From stress and fear! That’s how it’s done
—reaching into the next reality! The dream-time!”
Right now Fat sat on the plastic and chrome couch mentally dying; in
fact he was already mentally dead, and in the room he had left, the experts
were deciding his fate, passing sentence and judgment on what remained of
him. It is proper that technically qualified non-lunatics should sit in
judgment on lunatics. How could things be otherwise?
--- PAGE 53 ---
“If they could just get across to the dream-time!” Kevin shouted. “That’s
the only real time; all the real events happen in the dream-time! The actions
of the gods!”
Beside Fat the huge old lady held up a plastic pan; for hours she had been
trying to throw up the Thorazine they had forced on her; she believed, she
rasped at Fat, that the Thorazine had poison in it, by which her husband—
who had penetrated the top levels of the hospital staff under a variety of
names—intended to finish killing her.
“You found your way into the upper realm,” Kevin declared. “Isn’t that
how you put it in your journal?”
48. Two realms there are, upper and lower. The upper derived from
hyperuniverse I or Yang, Form I of Parmenides, is sentient and
volitional. The lower realm, or Yin, Form II of Parmenides, is
mechanical, driven by blind, efficient cause, deterministic and without
intelligence, since it emanates from a dead source. In ancient times it
was termed “astral determinism.” We are trapped, by and large, in the
lower realm, but are, through the sacraments, by means of the
plásmate, extricated. Until astral determinism is broken, we are not
even aware of it, so occluded are we. “The Empire never ended.”
A small, pretty, dark-haired girl walked silently past Fat and the huge old
woman, carrying her shoes. At breakfast time she had tried to smash a
window using her shoes and then, having failed, knocked down a six-foot-
high black technician. Now the girl had about her the presence of absolute
calm.
“The Empire never ended,” Fat quoted to himself. That one sentence
appeared over and over again in his exegesis; it had become his tag line.
Originally the sentence had been revealed to him in a great dream. In the
dream he again was a child, searching dusty used-book stores for rare old
science fiction magazines, in particular Astoundings. In the dream he had
looked through countless tattered issues, stacks upon stacks, for the
priceless serial entitled “The Empire Never Ended.” If he could find it and
read it he would know everything; that had been the burden of the dream.
Prior to that, during the interval in which he had experienced the two-
world superimposition, he had seen not only California, USA, of the year
1974 but also ancient Rome, he had discerned within the superimposition a
Gestalt shared by both space-time continua, their common element: a Black
Iron Prison. This is what the dream referred to as “the Empire.” He knew it
--- PAGE 54 ---
because, upon seeing the Black Iron Prison, he had recognized it. Everyone
dwelt in it without realizing it. The Black Iron Prison was their world.
Who had built the prison—and why—he could not say. But he could
discern one good thing: the prison lay under attack. An organization of
Christians, not regular Christians such as those who attended church every
Sunday and prayed, but secret early Christians wearing light gray-colored
robes, had started an assault on the prison, and with success. The secret,
early Christians were filled with joy.
Fat, in his madness, understood the reason for their joy. This time the
early, secret, gray-robed Christians would get the prison, rather than the
other way around. The deeds of the heroes, in the sacred dream-time . . . the
only time, according to the bushmen, that was real.
Once, in a cheap science fiction novel, Fat had come across a perfect
description of the Black Iron Prison but set in the far future. So if you
superimposed the past (ancient Rome) over the present (California in the
twentieth century) and superimposed the far future world of The Android
Cried Me a River over that, you got the Empire, the Black Iron Prison, as
the supra- or trans-temporal constant. Everyone who had ever lived was
literally surrounded by the iron walls of the prison; they were all inside it
and none of them knew it—except for the gray-robed secret Christians.
That made the early, secret Christians supra- or trans-temporal, too,
which is to say present at all times, a situation which Fat could not fathom.
How could they be early but in the present and the future? And if they
existed in the present, why couldn’t anyone see them. On the other hand,
why couldn’t anyone see the walls of the Black Iron Prison which enclosed
everyone, including himself, on all sides? Why did these antithetical forces
emerge into palpability only when the past, present and future somehow—
for whatever reason—got superimposed?
Maybe in the bushmen’s dream-time no time existed. But if no time
existed, how could the early, secret Christians be scampering away in glee
from the Black Iron Prison which they had just succeeded in blowing up?
And how could they blow it up back in Rome circa 70 C.E., since no
explosives existed in those days? And how, if no time passed in the dream-
time, could the prison come to an end? It reminded Fat of the peculiar
statement in Parsifal: “You see, my son, here time turns into space.” During
his religious experience in March of 1974, Fat had seen an augmentation of
space: yards and yards of space, extending all the way to the stars; space
--- PAGE 55 ---
opened up around him as if a confining box had been removed. He had felt
like a tomcat which had been carried inside a box on a car drive, and then
they’d reached their destination and he had been let out of the box, let free.
And at night in sleep he had dreamed of a measureless void, yet a void
which was alive. The void extended and drifted and seemed totally empty
and yet it possessed personality. The void expressed delight in seeing Fat,
who, in the dreams, had no body; he, like the boundless void, merely
drifted, very slowly; and he could, in addition, hear a faint humming, like
music. Apparently the void communicated through this echo, this humming.
“You of all people,” the void communicated. “Out of everyone, it is you I
love the most.”
The void had been waiting to be reunited with Horselover Fat, of all the
humans who had ever existed. Like its extension into space, the love in the
void lay boundless; it and its love floated forever. Fat had never been so
happy in all his life.
The psych tech walked up to him and said, “We are holding you for
fourteen days.”
“I can’t go home?” Fat said.
“No, we feel you need treatment. You’re not ready to go home yet.”
“Read me my rights,” Fat said, feeling numb and afraid.
“We can hold you fourteen days without a court hearing. After that with
court approval we can, if we feel it’s necessary, hold you another ninety
days.”
Fat knew that if he said anything, anything at all, they would hold him
the ninety days. So he said nothing. When you are crazy you learn to keep
quiet.
Being crazy and getting caught at it, out in the open, turns out to be a
way to wind up in jail. Fat now knew this. Besides having a county drunk
tank, the County of Orange had a county lunatic tank. He was in it. He
could stay in it for a long time. Meanwhile, back at home, Beth
undoubtedly was taking everything she wanted from their house to the
apartment she had rented—she had refused to tell him where the apartment
was; she wouldn’t even tell him the city.
Actually, although Fat didn’t know it at the time, due to his own folly he
had allowed payment on his house to lapse, as well as on his car; he had not
paid the electric bill nor the phone bill. Beth, distraught over Fat’s mental
and physical state, could not be expected to take on the crushing problems
--- PAGE 56 ---
Fat had created. So when Fat got out of the hospital and returned home he
found a notice of foreclosure, his car gone, the refrigerator leaking water,
and when he tried to phone for help the phone was dreadfully silent. This
had the effect of wiping out what little morale he had left, and he knew it
was all his own fault. It was his karma.
Right now, Fat did not know these things. All he knew was that he had
been thrown in the lock-up for a minimum of two weeks. Also, he had
found out one other thing, from the other patients. The County of Orange
would bill him for his stay in the lock-up. As a matter of fact his total bill,
including that portion covering his time in the cardiac intensive care ward,
came to over two thousand dollars. Fat had gone to the county hospital in
the first place because he didn’t have the money to be taken to a private
hospital. So now he had learned something else about being crazy: not only
does it get you locked up, but it costs you a lot of money. They can bill you
for being crazy and if you don’t pay or can’t pay they can sue you, and if a
court judgment is issued against you and you fail to comply, they can lock
you up again, as being in contempt of court.
When you consider that Fat’s original suicide attempt had emanated out
of deep despair, the magic of his present situation, the glamor, somehow
had departed. Beside him on the plastic and chrome couch the huge old lady
continued to throw up her medication in the plastic basin provided by the
hospital for such matters. The psych tech had taken hold of Fat by the arm
to lead him to the ward where he would be confined during the two weeks
ahead. They called it the North Ward. Unprotestingly, Fat accompanied the
psych tech out of the receiving ward, across the hall and into the North
Ward, where once again the door got locked behind him.
Fuck, Fat said to himself.
The psych tech escorted Fat to his room—which had two beds in it instead
of six cots—and then took Fat to a small room to get a questionaire filled
out. “This’ll only take a few minutes,” the psych tech said.
In the small room stood a girl, a Mexican girl, heavy-set, with rough,
dark skin and huge eyes, dark and peaceful eyes, eyes like pools of fire; Fat
stopped dead in his tracks as he saw the girl’s flaming, peaceful huge eyes.
The girl held a magazine open on top of the TV set; she displayed a crude
drawing printed on the page: a picture of the Peaceful Kingdom. The
--- PAGE 57 ---
magazine, Fat realized, was the Watchtower. The girl, smiling at him, was a
Jehovah’s Witness.
The girl said in a gentle and moderated voice, to Fat and not to the psych
tech, “Our Lord God has prepared for us a place to live where there will be
no pain and no fear and see? The animals lie happily together, the lion and
the lamb, as we shall be, all of us, friends who love one another, without
suffering or death, forever and ever with our Lord Jehovah who loves us
and will never abandon us, whatever we do.”
“Debbie, please leave the lounge,” the psych tech said.
Still smiling at Fat, the girl pointed to a cow and a lamb in the crude
drawing. “All beasts, all men, all living creatures great and small will bask
in the warmth of Jehovah’s love, when the Kingdom arrives. You think it
will be a long time, but Christ Jesus is with us today.” Then, closing up the
magazine, the girl still smiling but now silent, left the room.
“Sorry about that,” the psych tech said to Fat.
“Gosh,” Fat said, amazed.
“Did she upset you? I’m sorry about that. She’s not supposed to have that
literature; somebody must have smuggled it in to her.”
Fat said, “I’ll be okay.” He realized it; it dazed him.
“Let’s get this information down,” the psych tech said, seating himself
with his clipboard and pen. “The date of your birth.”
You fool, Fat thought. You fucking fool. God is here in your goddam
mental hospital and you don’t know it; you see it but you don’t know it.
You have been invaded and you don’t even know it.
He felt joy.
He remembered entry 9 from his exegesis. He lived a long time ago but
he is still alive. He is still alive, Fat thought. After all that’s happened. After
the pills, after the slashed wrist, after the car exhaust. After being locked up.
He is still alive.
After a few days, the patient he liked best in the ward was Doug, a large,
young, deteriorated hebephrenic who never put on street clothing but
simply wore a hospital gown open at the back. The women in the ward
washed, cut and brushed Doug’s hair because he lacked the skills to do
those things himself. Doug did not take his situation seriously, except when
they all got wakened up for breakfast. Every day Doug greeted Fat with
terror.
--- PAGE 58 ---
“The TV lounge has devils in it,” Doug always said, every morning. “I’m
afraid to go in there. Can you feel it? I feel it even walking past it.”
When they all made out their lunch orders Doug wrote:
SWILL
“I’m ordering swill,” he told Fat.
Fat said, “I’m ordering dirt.”
In the central office, which had glass walls and a locked door, the staff
watched the patients and made notations. In Fat’s case it got noted down
that when the patients played cards (which took up half their time, since no
therapy existed) Fat never joined in. The other patients played poker and
blackjack, while Fat sat off by himself reading.
“Why don’t you play cards?” Penny, a psych tech, asked him.
“Poker and blackjack are not card games but money games,” Fat said,
lowering his book. “Since we’re not allowed to have any money on us,
there’s no point in playing.”
“I think you should play cards,” Penny said.
Fat knew that he had been ordered to play cards, so he and Debbie played
kid’s card games like “Fish.” They played “Fish” for hours. The staff
watched from their glass office and noted down what they saw.
One of the women had managed to retain possession of her Bible. For the
thirty-five patients it was the only Bible. Debbie was not allowed to look at
it. However, at one turn in the corridor—they were locked out of their
rooms during the day, so that they could not lie down and sleep—the staff
couldn’t see what was happening. Fat sometimes turned their copy of the
Bible, their communal copy, over to Debbie for a fast look at one of the
psalms. The staff knew what they were doing and detested them for it, but
by the time a tech got out of the office and down the corridor, Debbie had
strolled on.
Mental inmates always move at one speed and one speed only. But some
always move slowly and some always run. Debbie, being wide and solid,
sailed along slowly, as did Doug. Fat, who always walked with Doug,
matched his pace to his. Together they circled around and around the
corridor, conversing. Conversations in mental hospitals resemble
conversations in bus stations, because in a Greyhound Bus Station everyone
--- PAGE 59 ---
is waiting, and in a mental hospital—especially a county lock-up mental
hospital—everyone is waiting. They wait to get out.
Not much goes on in a mental ward, contrary to what mythic novels
relate. Patients do not really overpower the staff, and the staff does not
really murder the patients. Mostly people read or watch TV or just sit
smoking or try to lie down on a couch and sleep, or drink coffee or play
cards or walk, and three times a day trays of food are served. The passage
of time is designated by the arrival of the food carts. At night visitors show
up and they always smile. Patients in a mental hospital can never figure out
why people from the outside smile. To me, it remains a mystery to this day.
Medication, which is always referred to as “meds,” gets doled out at
irregular intervals, from tiny paper cups. Everyone is given Thorazine plus
something else. They do not tell you what you are getting and they watch to
make sure you swallow the pills. Sometimes the meds nurses fuck up and
bring the same tray of medication around twice. The patients always point
out that they just took their meds ten minutes ago and the nurses give them
the meds again anyhow. The mistake is never discovered until the end of the
day, and the staff refuses to talk about it to the patients, all of whom now
have twice as much Thorazine in their systems as they are supposed to
have.
I have never met a mental patient, even the paranoid ones, who believed
that double-dosing was a tactic to oversedate the ward deliberately. It is
patently obvious that the nurses are dumb. The nurses have enough trouble
figuring out which patient is which, and finding each patient’s little paper
cup. This is because a ward population constantly changes; new people
arrive; old people get discharged. The real danger in a mental ward is that
someone spaced out on PCP1 will be admitted by mistake. The policy of
many mental hospitals is to refuse PCP users and force the armed police to
process them. The armed police constantly try to force the PCP users onto
the unarmed mental hospital patients and staffs. Nobody wants to deal with
a PCP user, for good reasons. The newspapers constantly relate how a PCP
freak, locked up in a ward somewhere, bit off another person’s nose or tore
out his own eyes.
Fat was spared this. He did not even know such horrors existed. This
came about through the wise planning of OCMC, which made sure that no
PCP-head wound up in the North Ward. In point of fact, Fat owed his life to
--- PAGE 60 ---
OCMC (as well as two thousand dollars), although his mind remained too
fried for him to appreciate this.
When Beth read the itemized bill from OCMC, she could not believe the
number of things they had done for her husband to keep him alive; the list
ran to five pages. It even included oxygen. Fat did not know it, but the
nurses at the intensive cardiac care ward believed that he would die. They
monitored him constantly. Every now and then, in the intensive cardiac care
ward, an emergency warning siren sounded. It meant someone had lost vital
signs. Fat, lying in his bed attached as he was to the video screen, felt as if
he had been placed next to a switching yard for railroad trains; life support
mechanisms constantly sounded their various noises.
It is characteristic of the mentally ill to hate those who help them and
love those who connive against them. Fat still loved Beth and he detested
OCMC. This showed he belonged in the North Ward; I have no doubt of it.
Beth knew when she took Christopher and left for parts unknown that Fat
would try suicide; he’d tried it in Canada. In fact, Beth planned to move
back in as soon as Fat offed himself. She told him so later. Also, she told
him that it had infuriated her that he’d failed to kill himself. When he asked
her why that had infuriated her, Beth said:
“You have once again shown your inability to do anything.”
The distinction between sanity and insanity is narrower than the razor’s
edge, sharper than a hound’s tooth, more agile than a mule deer. It is more
elusive than the merest phantom. Perhaps it does not even exist; perhaps it
is a phantom.
Ironically, Fat hadn’t been tossed into the lock-up because he was crazy
(although he was); the reason, technically, consisted of the “danger to
yourself” law. Fat constituted a menace to his own well-being, a charge that
could be brought against many people. At the time he lived in the North
Ward a number of psychological tests were administered to him. He passed
them, but on the other hand he had the good sense not to talk about God.
Though he passed all the tests, Fat had faked them out. To while away the
time he drew over and over again pictures of the German knights who
Alexander Nevsky had lured onto the ice, lured to their deaths. Fat
identified with the heavily-armored Teutonic knights with their slot-eyed
masks and ox-horns projecting out on each side; he drew each knight
carrying a huge shield and a naked sword; on the shield Fat wrote: “In hoc
signo vinces,” which he got from a pack of cigarettes. It means, “In this sign
--- PAGE 61 ---
you shall conquer.” The sign took the form of an iron cross. His love of God
had turned to anger, an obscure anger. He had visions of Christopher racing
across a grassy field, his little blue coat flapping behind him, Christopher
running and running. No doubt this was Horselover Fat himself running, the
child in him, anyhow. Running from something as obscure as his anger.
In addition he several times wrote:
Dico per spiritum sanctum. Haec veritas est. Mihi crede et mecum in
aeternitate vivebis. Entry 28.
This meant, “I speak by means of the Holy Spirit. This is the truth.
Believe me and you will live with me in eternity.”
One day on a list of printed instructions posted on the wall of the corridor
he wrote:
Ex Deo nascimur, in Jesu mortimur, per spiritum sanctum
reviviscimus.
Doug asked him what it meant.
“‘From God we are born,’” Fat translated, “‘in Jesus we die, by the
Holy Spirit we live again.’”
“You’re going to be here ninety days,” Doug said.
One time Fat found a posted notice that fascinated him. The notice
stipulated what could not be done, in order of descending importance. Near
the top of the list all parties concerned were told:
NO ONE IS TO REMOVE ASHTRAYS FROM THE WARD.
And later down the list it stated:
FRONTAL LOBOTOMIES ARE NOT TO BE PERFORMED
WITHOUT THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE PATIENT.
“That should read ‘prefrontal,’” Doug said, and wrote in the “pre.”
“How do you know that?” Fat said.
“There’s two ways of knowing,” Doug said. “Either knowledge arises
through the sense organs and is called empirical knowledge, or it arises
within your head and it’s called a priori.” Doug wrote on the notice:
IF I BRING BACK THE ASHTRAYS, CAN I HAVE MY PREFRONTAL?
--- PAGE 62 ---
“You’ll be here ninety days,” Fat said.
Outside the building rain poured down. It had been raining since Fat
arrived in the North Ward. If he stood on top of the washing machine in the
laundry room, he could see out through a barred window to the parking lot.
People parked their cars and then ran through the rain. Fat felt glad he was
indoors in the ward.
Dr. Stone, who had charge of the ward, interviewed him one day.
“Did you ever try suicide before?” Dr. Stone asked him.
“No,” Fat said, which of course wasn’t true. At that moment he no longer
remembered Canada. It was his impression that his life had begun two
weeks ago when Beth walked out.
“I think,” Dr. Stone said, “that when you tried to kill yourself you got in
touch with reality for the first time.”
“Maybe so,” Fat said.
“What I am going to give you,” Dr. Stone said, opening a black suitcase
on his small cluttered desk, “we term the Bach remedies.” He pronounced it
batch. “These organic remedies are distilled from certain flowers which
grow in Wales. Dr. Bach wandered through the fields and pastures of Wales
experiencing every negative mental state that exists. With each state that he
experienced he gently held one flower after another. The proper flower
trembled in the cup of Dr. Bach’s hand and he then developed unique
methods of acquiring an essence in elixir form of each flower and
combinations of flowers which I have prepared in a rum base.” He put three
bottles together on the desk, found a larger, empty bottle, and poured the
contents of the three into it. “Take six drops a day,” Dr. Stone said. “There
is no way the Bach remedies can hurt you. They are not toxic chemicals.
They will remove your sense of helplessness and fear and inability to act.
My diagnosis is that those are the three areas you have blocks: fear,
helplessness and an inability to act. What you should have done instead of
trying to kill yourself would have been, take your son away from your wife
—it’s the law in California that a minor child must remain with his father
until there is a court order to the contrary. And then you should have lightly
struck your wife with a rolled-up newspaper or a phonebook.”
“Thank you,” Fat said, accepting the bottle. He could see that Dr. Stone
was totally crazy, but in a good way. Dr. Stone was the first person at the
North Ward, outside the patients, who had talked to him as if he were
human.
--- PAGE 63 ---
“You have much anger in you,” Dr. Stone said. “I am lending you a copy
of the Tao Te Ching. Have you ever read Lao Tzu?”
“No,” Fat admitted.
“Let me read you this part here,” Dr. Stone said. He read aloud.
“Its upper part is not dazzling;
Its lower part is not obscure.
Dimly visible, it cannot be named
And returns to that which is without substance.
This is called the shape that has no shape,
The image that is without substance.
This is called indistinct and shadowy.
Go up to it and you will not see its head;
Follow behind it and you will not see its rear.”
Hearing this, Fat remembered entries 1 and 2 from his journal. He quoted
them, from memory, to Dr. Stone.
1. One Mind there is; but under it two principles contend.
2. The Mind lets in the light, then the dark; in interaction; so time is
generated. At the end Mind awards victory to the light; time ceases and
the Mind is complete.
“But,” Dr. Stone said, “if Mind awards victory to the light, and the dark
disappears, then reality will disappear, since reality is a compound of Yang
and Yin equally.”
“Yang is Form I of Parmenides,” Fat said. “Yin is Form II. Parmenides
argued that Form II does not in fact exist. Only Form I exists. Parmenides
believed in a monistic world. People imagine that both forms exist, but they
are wrong. Aristotle relates that Parmenides equates Form I with ‘that
which is’ and Form II with ‘that which is not.’ Thus people are deluded.”
Eying him, Dr. Stone said, “What’s your source?”
“Edward Hussey,” Fat said.
“He’s at Oxford,” Dr. Stone said. “I attended Oxford. In my opinion
Hussey has no peer.”
“You’re right,” Fat said.
“What else can you tell me?” Dr. Stone said.
Fat said, “Time does not exist. This is the great secret known to
Apollonius of Tyana, Paul of Tarsus, Simon Magus, Paracelsus, Boehme
--- PAGE 64 ---
and Bruno. The universe is contracting into a unitary entity which is
completing itself. Decay and disorder are seen by us in reverse, as
increasing. Entry 18 of my exegesis reads: ‘Real time ceased in 70 C.E.
with the fall of the Temple of Jerusalem. It began again in 1974. The
intervening period was a perfect spurious interpolation aping the
Creation of the Mind.’”
“Interpolated by whom?” Dr. Stone asked.
“The Black Iron Prison, which is an expression of the Empire. What has
been—” Fat had started to say, “What has been revealed to me.” He rechose
his words. “What has been most important in my discoveries is this: ‘The
Empire never ended.’”
Leaning against his desk, Dr. Stone folded his arms, rocked forward and
back and studied Fat, waiting to hear more.
“That’s all I know,” Fat said, becoming belatedly cautious.
“I’m very interested in what you’re saying,” Dr. Stone said.
Fat realized that one of two possibilities existed and only two; either Dr.
Stone was totally insane—not just insane but totally so—or else in an artful,
professional fashion he had gotten Fat to talk; he had drawn Fat out and
now knew that Fat was totally insane. Which meant that Fat could look
forward to a court appearance and ninety days.
This is a mournful discovery.
1) Those who agree with you are insane.
2) Those who do not agree with you are in power.
Those were the twin realizations which now percolated through Fat’s
head. He decided to go for broke, to tell Dr. Stone the most fantastic entry
in his exegesis.
“Entry number twenty-four,” Fat said. “‘In dormant seed form, as
living information, the plásmate slumbered in the buried library of
codices at Chenoboskion until—’”
“What is ‘Chenoboskion’?” Dr. Stone interrupted.
“Nag Hammadi.”
“Oh, the Gnostic library.” Dr. Stone nodded. “Found and read in 1945 but
never published. ‘Living information’?” His eyes fixed themselves in intent
scrutiny of Fat. “‘Living information,’” he echoed. And then he said, “The
Logos.”
--- PAGE 65 ---
Fat trembled.
“Yes,” Dr. Stone said. “The Logos would be living information, capable
of replicating.”
“Replicating not through information,” Fat said, “in information, but as
information. This is what Jesus meant when he spoke elliptically of the
‘mustard seed’ which, he said, ‘would grow into a tree large enough for
birds to roost in.’”
“There is no mustard tree,” Dr. Stone agreed. “So Jesus could not have
meant that literally. That fits with the so-called ‘secrecy’ theme of Mark;
that he didn’t want outsiders to know the truth. And you know?”
“Jesus foresaw not only his own death but that of all—” Fat hesitated.
“Homoplásmates. That’s a human being to which the plásmate had
crossbonded. Interspecies symbiosis. As living information the plásmate
travels up the optic nerve of a human to the pineal body. It uses the
human brain as a female host—”
Dr. Stone grunted and squeezed himself violently.
“—in which to replicate itself into its active form,” Fat said. “The
Hermetic alchemists knew of it in theory from ancient texts but could
not duplicate it, since they could not locate the dormant buried
plásmate.”
“But you’re saying the plásmate—the Logos—was dug up at Nag
Hammadi!”
“Yes, when the codices were read.”
“You’re sure it wasn’t in dormant seed form at Qumran? In Cave Five?”
“Well,” Fat said, uncertainly.
“Where did the plásmate originally come from?”
After a pause Fat said, “From another star system.”
“You wish to identify that star system?”
“Sirius,” Fat said.
“Then you believe that the Dogon People of the western Sudan are the
source of Christianity.”
“They use the fish sign,” Fat said. “For Nommo, the benign twin.”
“Who would be Form I or Yang.”
“Right,” Fat said.
“And Yurugu is Form II. But you believe that Form II doesn’t exist.”
“Nommo had to slay her,” Fat said.
--- PAGE 66 ---
“That’s what the Japanese myth stipulates, in ásense,” Dr. Stone said.
“Their cosmogonical myth. The female twin dies giving birth to fire; then
she descends under the ground. The male twin goes after her to restore her
but finds her decomposing and giving birth to monsters. She pursues him
and he seals her up under the ground.”
Amazed, Fat said, “She’s decomposing and yet she’s still giving birth?”
“Only to monsters,” Dr. Stone said.
About this time two new propositions entered Fat’s mind, due to this
particular conversation.
1) Some of those in power are insane.
2) And they are right.
By “right” read “in touch with reality.” Fat had reverted back to his most
dismal insight, that the universe and the Mind behind it which governed it
are both totally irrational. He wondered if he should mention this to Dr.
Stone, who seemed to understand Fat better than anyone else during all
Fat’s life.
“Dr. Stone,” he said, “there’s something I want to ask you. I want your
professional opinion.”
“Name it.”
“Could the universe possibly be irrational?”
“You mean not guided by a mind. I suggest you turn to Xenophanes.”
“Sure,” Fat said. “Xenophanes of Colophon. ‘One god there is, in no way
like mortal creatures either in bodily form or in the thought of his mind. The
whole of him sees, the whole of him thinks, the whole of him hears. He
stays always motionless in the same place; it is not right—’”
“‘Fitting,’” Dr. Stone corrected. “‘It is not fitting that he should move
about now this way, now that.’ And the important part, Fragment 25. ‘But,
effortlessly, he wields all things by the thought of his mind.’”
“But he could be irrational,” Fat said.
“How would we know?”
“The whole universe would be irrational.”
Dr. Stone said, “Compared with what?”
That, Fat hadn’t thought of. But as soon as he thought of it he realized
that it did not tear down his fear; it increased it. If the whole universe were
--- PAGE 67 ---
irrational, because it was directed by an irrational—that is to say, insane—
mind, whole species could come into existence, live and perish and never
guess, precisely for the reason that Stone had just given.
“The Logos isn’t rational,” Fat decided out loud. “What I call the
plásmate. Buried as information in the codices at Nag Hammadi. Which is
back with us now, creating new homoplásmates. The Romans, the Empire,
killed all the original ones.”
“But you say real time ceased in 70 A.D. when the Romans destroyed the
Temple. Therefore these are still Roman times; the Romans are still here.
This is roughly—” Dr. Stone calculated. “About 100 A.D.”
Fat realized, then, that this explained his double exposure, the
superimposition he had seen of ancient Rome and California 1974. Dr.
Stone had solved it for him.
The psychiatrist in charge of treating him for his lunacy had ratified it.
Now Fat would never depart from faith in his encounter with God. Dr.
Stone had nailed it down.
--- PAGE 68 ---

--- PAGE 69 ---
5
FAT SPENT THIRTEEN days at North Ward, drinking coffee and reading and
walking around with Doug, but he never got to talk to Dr. Stone again
because Stone had too many responsibilities, inasmuch as he had charge of
the whole ward and everyone in it, staff and patients alike.
Well, he did have one brief dipshit hurried interchange at the time of his
discharge from the ward.
“I think you’re ready to leave,” Stone said cheerfully.
Fat said, “But let me ask you. I’m not talking about no mind at all
directing the universe. I’m talking about a mind like Xenophanes conceived
of, but the mind is insane.”
“The Gnostics believed that the creator deity was insane,” Stone said.
“Blind. I want to show you something. It hasn’t been published yet; I have
it in a typescript from Orval Wintermute who is currently working with
Bethge in translating the Nag Hammadi codices. This quote comes from On
the Origin of the World. Read it.”
Fat read it to himself, holding the precious typescript.
“He said, ‘I am god and no other one exists except me.’ But when he
said these things, he sinned against all of the immortal
(imperishable) ones, and they protected him. Moreover, when Pistis
saw the impiety of the chief ruler, she was angry. Without being
seen, she said, ‘You err, Samael,’ i.e., ‘the blind god.’ ‘An
enlightened, immortal man exists before you. This will appear
within your molded bodies. He will trample upon you like potter’s
clay, (which) is trampled. And you will go with those who are yours
down to your mother, the abyss.’”
At once, Fat understood what he had read. Samael was the creator deity
and he imagined that he was the only god, as stated in Genesis. However, he
was blind, which is to say, occluded. “Occluded” was Fat’s salient term. It
embraced all other terms: insane, mad, irrational, whacked out, fucked up,
--- PAGE 70 ---
fried, psychotic. In his blindness (state of irrationality; i.e., cut off from
reality), he did not realize that—
What did the typescript say? Feverishly, he searched over it, at which Dr.
Stone thereupon patted him on the arm and told him he could keep the
typescript; Stone had Xeroxed it several times over.
An enlightened, immortal man existed before the creator deity, and that
enlightened, immortal man would appear within the human race which
Samael was going to create. And that enlightened, immortal man who had
existed before the creator deity would trample upon the fucked-up blind
deluded creator like potter’s clay.
Hence Fat’s encounter with God—the true God—had come through the
little pot Oh Ho which Stephanie had thrown for him on her kickwheel.
“Then I’m right about Nag Hammadi,” he said to Dr. Stone.
“You would know,” Dr. Stone said, and then he said something that no
one had ever said to Fat before. “You’re the authority,” Dr. Stone said.
Fat realized that Stone had restored his—Fat’s—spiritual life. Stone had
saved him; he was a master psychiatrist. Everything which Stone had said
and done vis-à-vis Fat had a therapeutic basis, a therapeutic thrust. Whether
the content of Stone’s information was correct was not important; his
purpose from the beginning had been to restore Fat’s faith in himself, which
had vanished when Beth left—which had vanished, actually, when he had
failed to save Gloria’s life years ago.
Dr. Stone wasn’t insane; Stone was a healer. He held down the right job.
Probably he healed many people and in many ways. He adapted his therapy
to the individual, not the individual to the therapy.
I’ll be goddamned, Fat thought.
In that simple sentence, “You’re the authority,” Stone had given Fat back
his soul.
The soul which Gloria, with her hideous malignant psychological death-
game, had taken away.
They—note the “they”—paid Dr. Stone to figure out what had destroyed
the patient entering the ward. In each case a bullet had been fired at him,
somewhere, at some time, in his life. The bullet entered him and the pain
began to spread out. Insidiously, the pain filled him up until he split in half,
right down the middle. The task of the staff, and even of the other patients,
was to put the person back together but this could not be done so long as the
bullet remained. All that lesser therapists did was note the person split into
--- PAGE 71 ---
two pieces and begin the job of patching him back into a unity; but they
failed to find and remove the bullet. The fatal bullet fired at the person was
the basis of Freud’s original attack on the psychologically injured person;
Freud had understood: he called it a trauma. Later on, everyone got tired of
searching for the fatal bullet; it took too long. Too much had to be learned
about the patient. Dr. Stone had a paranormal talent, like his paranormal
Bach remedies which were a palpable hoax, a pretext to listen to the patient.
Rum with a flower dipped in it—nothing more, but a sharp mind hearing
what the patient said.
Dr. Leon Stone turned out to be one of the most important people in
Horselover Fat’s life. To get to Stone, Fat had had to nearly kill himself
physically, matching his mental death. Is this what they mean about God’s
mysterious ways? How else could Fat have linked up with Leon Stone?
Only some dismal act of the order of a suicide attempt, a truly lethal
attempt, would have achieved it; Fat had to die, or nearly die, to be cured.
Or nearly cured.
I wonder where Leon Stone practices now. I wonder what his recovery
rate is. I wonder how he got his paranormal abilities. I wonder a lot of
things. The worst event in Fat’s life—Beth leaving him, taking Christopher,
and Fat trying to kill himself—had brought on limitless benign
consequences. If you judge the merits of a sequence by their final outcome,
Fat had just gone through the best period of his life; he emerged from North
Ward as strong as he would ever get. After all, no man is infinitely strong;
for every creature that runs, flies, hops or crawls there is a terminal nemesis
which he will not circumvent, which will finally do him in. But Dr. Stone
had added the missing element to Fat, the element taken away from him,
half-deliberately, by Gloria Knudson, who wished to take as many people
with her as she could: self-confidence. “You are the authority,” Stone had
said, and that sufficed.
I’ve always told people that for each person there is a sentence—a series
of words—which has the power to destroy him. When Fat told me about
Leon Stone I realized (this came years after the first realization) that
another sentence exists, another series of words, which will heal the person.
If you’re lucky you will get the second; but you can be certain of getting the
first: that is the way it works. On their own, without training, individuals
know how to deal out the lethal sentence, but training is required to deal out
the second. Stephanie had come close when she made the little ceramic pot
--- PAGE 72 ---
Oh Ho and presented it to Fat as her gift of love, a love she lacked the
verbal skills to articulate.
How, when Stone gave Fat the typescript material from the Nag
Hammadi codex, had he known the significance of pot and potier to Fat? To
know that, Stone would have to be telepathic. Well, I have no theory. Fat, of
course, has. He believes that like Stephanie, Dr. Stone was a micro-form of
God. That’s why I say Fat is nearly healed, not healed.
Yet by regarding benign people as micro-forms of God, Fat at least
remained in touch with a good god, not a blind, cruel or evil one. That point
should be considered. Fat had a high regard for God. If the Logos was
rational, and the Logos equaled God, then God had to be rational. This is
why the Fourth Gospel’s statement about the identity of the Logos is so
important: “Kai theos en ho logos” which is to say “and the word was
God.” In the New Testament, Jesus says that no one has seen God but him;
that is, Jesus Christ, the Logos of the Fourth Gospel. If that be correct, what
Fat experienced was the Logos. But the Logos is God; so to experience
Christ is to experience God. Perhaps a more important statement shows up
in a book of the New Testament which most people don’t read; they read
the gospels and the letters of Paul, but who reads One John?
“My dear people, we are already the children of God but what we
are to be in the future has not yet been revealed; all we know is, that
we shall be like him because we shall see him as he really is.”
(1 John 3:1/2)
It can be argued that this is the most important statement in the New
Testament; certainly it is the most important not-generally-known
statement. We shall be like him. That means that man is isomorphic with
God. We shall see him as he really is. There will occur a theophany, at least
to some. Fat could base the credentials for his whoe encounter on this
passage. He could claim that his encounter with God consisted of a
fulfillment of the promise of 1 John 3:1/2—as Bible scholars indicate it, a
sort of code which they can read off in an instant, as cryptic as it looks.
Oddly, to a certain extent this passage dovetails with the Nag Hammadi
typescript that Dr. Stone handed to Fat the day Fat got discharged from
North Ward. Man and the true God are identical—as the Logos and the true
God are—but a lunatic blind creator and his screwed-up world separate man
--- PAGE 73 ---
from God. That the blind creator sincerely imagines that he is the true God
only reveals the extent of his occlusion. This is Gnosticism. In Gnosticism,
man belongs with God against the world and the creator of the world (both
of which are crazy, whether they realize it or not). The answer to Fat’s
question, “Is the universe irrational, and is it irrational because an irrational
mind governs it?” receives this answer, via Dr. Stone: “Yes it is, the
universe is irrational; the mind governing it is irrational; but above them
lies another God, the true God, and he is not irrational; in addition that true
God has outwitted the powers of this world, ventured here to help us, and
we know him as the Logos,” which, according to Fat, is living information.
Perhaps Fat had discerned a vast mystery, in calling the Logos living
information. But perhaps not. Proving things of this sort is difficult. Who do
you ask? Fat, fortunately, asked Leon Stone. He might have asked one of
the staff, in which case he would still be in North Ward drinking coffee,
reading, walking around with Doug.
Above everything else, outranking every other aspect, object, quality of
his encounter. Fat had witnessed a benign power which had invaded this
world. No other term fitted it: the benign power, whatever it was, had
invaded this world, like a champion ready to do battle. That terrified him
but it also excited his joy because he understood what it meant. Help had
come.
The universe might be irrational, but something rational had broken into
it, like a thief in the night breaks into a sleeping household, unexpectedly in
terms of place, in terms of time. Fat had seen it—not because there was
anything special about him—but because it had wanted him to see it.
Normally it remained camouflaged. Normally when it appeared no one
could distinguish it from ground—set to ground, as Fat correctly expressed
it. He had a name for it.
Zebra. Because it blended. The name for this is mimesis. Another name is
mimicry. Certain insects do this; they mimic other things: sometimes other
insects—poisonous ones—or twigs and the like. Certain biologists and
naturalists have speculated that higher forms of mimicry might exist, since
lower forms—which is to say, forms which fool those intended to be fooled
but not us—have been found all over the world.
What if a high form of sentient mimicry existed—such a high form that
no human (or few humans) had detected it? What if it could only be
detected if it wanted to be detected? Which is to say, not truly detected at
--- PAGE 74 ---
all, since under these circumstances it had advanced out of its camouflaged
state to disclose itself. “Disclose” might in this case equal “theophany.” The
astonished human being would say, I saw God; whereas in fact he saw only
a highly evolved ultra-terrestrial life form, a UTI, or an extra-terrestrial life
form (an ETI) which had come here at some time in the past . . . and
perhaps, as Fat conjectured, had slumbered for nearly two thousand years in
dormant seed form as living information in the codices at Nag Hammadi,
which explained why reports of its existence had broken off abruptly
around 70 A.D.
Entry 33 in Fat’s journal (i.e., his exegesis):
This loneliness, this anguish of the bereaved Mind, is felt by every
constituent of the universe. All its constituents are alive. Thus the
ancient Greek thinkers were hylozoists.
A “hylozoist” believes that the universe is alive; it’s about the same idea
as pan-psychism, that everything is animated. Pan-psychism or hylozoism
falls into two belief-classes:
1) Each object is independently alive.
2) Everything is one unitary entity; the universe is one thing, alive,
with one mind.
Fat had found a kind of middle ground. The universe consists of one vast
irrational entity into which has broken a high-order life form which
camouflages itself by a sophisticated mimicry; thereby as long as it cares to
it remains—by us—undetected. It mimics objects and causal processes (this
is what Fat claims); not just objects but what the objects do. From this, you
can gather that Fat conceives of Zebra as very large.
After a year of analyzing his encounter with Zebra, or God, or the Logos,
whatever, Fat came first to the conclusion that it had invaded our universe;
and a year later he realized that it was consuming—that is, devouring—our
universe. Zebra accomplished this by a process much like
transubstantiation. This is the miracle of communion in which the two
species, the wine and bread, invisibly become the blood and body of Christ.
Instead of seeing this in church, Fat had seen it out in the world; and not
in micro-form but in macro-form, which is to say, on a scale so vast that he
could not estimate its limits. The entire universe, possibly, is in the invisible
process of turning into the Lord. And with this process comes not just
--- PAGE 75 ---
sentience but—sanity. For Fat this would be a blessed relief. He had put up
with insanity for too long, both in himself and outside himself. Nothing
could have pleased him more.
If Fat was psychotic, you must admit that it is a strange sort of psychosis
to believe that you have encountered an inbreaking of the rational into the
irrational. How do you treat it? Send the afflicted person back to square
one? In that case, he is now cut off from the rational. This makes no sense,
in terms of therapy; it is an oxymoron, a verbal contradiction.
But an even more basic semantic problem lies exposed, here. Suppose I
say to Fat, or Kevin says to Fat, “You did not experience God. You merely
experienced something with the qualities and aspects and nature and powers
and wisdom and goodness of God.” This is like the joke about the German
proclivity toward double abstractions; a German authority on English
literature declares, “Hamlet was not written by Shakespeare; it was merely
written by a man named Shakespeare.” In English the distinction is verbal
and without meaning, although German as a language will express the
difference (which accounts for some of the strange features of the German
mind).
“I saw God,” Fat states, and Kevin and I and Sherri state, “No, you just
saw something like God, exactly like God.” And having spoke, we do not
stay to hear the answer, like jesting Pilate, upon his asking, “What is truth?”
Zebra broke through into our universe and fired beam after beam of
information-rich colored light at Fat’s brain, right through his skull,
blinding him and fucking him up and dazing and dazzling him, but
imparting to him knowledge beyond the telling. For openers, it saved
Christopher’s life.
More accurately speaking, it didn’t break through to fire the information;
it had at some past date broken through. What it did was step forward out of
its state of camouflage; it disclosed itself as set to ground and fired
information at a rate our calculations will not calibrate; it fired whole
libraries at him in nanoseconds. And it continued to do this for eight hours
of real elapsed time. Many nanoseconds exist in eight hours of RET. At
flash-cut speed you can load the right hemisphere of the human brain with a
titanic quantity of graphic data.
Paul of Tarsus had a similar experience. A long time ago. Much of it he
refused to discuss. According to his own statement, much of the information
fired at his head—right between the eyes, on his trip to Damascus—died
--- PAGE 76 ---
with him unsaid. Chaos reigns in the universe, but St. Paul knew who he
had talked to. He mentioned that. Zebra, too, identified itself, to Fat. It
termed itself “St. Sophia,” a designation unfamiliar to Fat. “St. Sophia” is
an unusual hypostasis of Christ.
Men and the world are mutually toxic to each other. But God—the true
God—has penetrated both, penetrated man and penetrated the world, and
sobers the landscape. But that God, the God from outside, encounters fierce
opposition. Frauds—the deceptions of madness—abound and mask
themselves as their mirror opposite: pose as sanity. The masks, however,
wear thin and the madness reveals itself. It is an ugly thing.
The remedy is here but so is the malady. As Fat repeats obsessively, “The
Empire never ended.” In a startling response to the crisis, the true God
mimics the universe, the very region he has invaded: he takes on the
likeness of sticks and trees and beer cans in gutters—he presumes to be
trash discarded, debris no longer noticed. Lurking, the true God literally
ambushes reality and us as well. God, in very truth, attacks and injures us,
in his role as antidote. As Fat can testify to, it is a scary experience to be
bushwhacked by the Living God. Hence we say, the true God is in the habit
of concealing himself. Twenty-five hundred years have passed since
Heraclitus wrote, “Latent form is the master of obvious form,” and, “The
nature of things is in the habit of concealing itself.”
So the rational, like a seed, lies concealed within the irrational bulk.
What purpose does the irrational bulk serve? Ask yourself what Gloria
gained by dying; not in terms of her death vis-à-vis herself but in terms of
those who loved her. She paid back their love with—well, with what?
Malice? Not proven. Hate? Not proven. With the irrational? Yes; proven. In
terms of the effect on her friends—such as Fat—no lucid purpose was
served but purpose there was: purpose without purpose, if you can conceive
of that. Her motive was no motive. We’re talking about nihilism. Under
everything else, even under death itself and the will towards death, lies
something else and that something else is nothing. The bedrock basic
stratum of reality is irreality; the universe is irrational because it is built not
on mere shifting sand—but on that which is not.
No help to Fat to know this: the why of Gloria’s taking him with her—or
doing her best to—when she went “Bitch,” he could have said if he could
have grabbed her. “Just tell me why; why the fucking why?” To which the
universe would hollowly respond, “My ways cannot be known, oh man.”
--- PAGE 77 ---
Which is to say, “My ways do not make sense, nor do the ways of those
who dwell in me.”
The bad news coming down the pipe for Fat was mercifully still
unknown to him, at this point, at the time of his discharge from North Ward.
He could not return to Beth, so who could he return to, when he hit the
outside world? In his mind, during his stay at North Ward, Sherri, who was
in remission from her cancer, had faithfully visited him. Therefore Fat had
engrammed onto her, believing that if he had one true friend in all the world
it was Sherri Solvig. His plan had unfolded like a bright star: he would live
with Sherri, helping to keep up her morale during her remission, and if she
lost her remission, he would care for her as she had cared for him during his
time in the hospital.
In no sense had Dr. Stone cured Fat, when the motor driving Fat got later
exposed. Fat homed in on death more rapidly and more expertly this time
than he had ever done before. He had become a professional at seeking out
pain; he had learned the rules of the game and now knew how to play. What
Fat in his lunacy—acquired from a lunatic universe; branded so by Fat’s
own analysis—sought was to be dragged down along with someone who
wanted to die. Had he gone through his address book he could not have
yielded up a better source than Sherri, “Smart move, Fat,” I would have told
him if I had known what he was planning for his future, during his stay at
North Ward. “You’ve really scored this time.” I knew Sherri; I knew she
spent all her time trying to figure out a way to lose her remission. I knew
that because she expressed fury and hatred, constantly, at the doctors who
had saved her. But I did not know what Fat had planned. Fat kept it a secret,
even from Sherri. I will help her, Fat said to himself in the depths of his
fried mind. I will help Sherri stay healthy but if and when she gets sick
again, there I will be at her side, ready to do anything for her.
His error, when deconstructed, amounted to this: Sherri did not merely
plan to get sick again; she like Gloria planned to take as many people with
her as possible—in direct proportion to their love toward her. Fat loved her
and, worse, felt gratitude towards her. Out of this clay, Sherri could throw a
pot with the warped kickwheel she used as a brain that would smash what
Leon Stone had done, smash what Stephanie had done, smash what God
had done. Sherri had more power in her weakened body than all these other
entities combined, including the living God.
--- PAGE 78 ---
Fat had decided to bind himself to the Antichrist. And out of the highest
possible motives: out of love, gratitude and the desire to help her.
Exactly what the powers of hell feed on: the best instincts in man.
Sherri Solvig, being poor, lived in a tiny rundown room with no kitchen;
she had to wash her dishes in the bathroom sink. The ceiling showed a vast
water stain, from a toilet upstairs which had overflowed. Having visited her
there a couple of times Fat knew the place and considered it depressing. He
had the impression that if Sherri moved out and into a nice appartment, a
modern one, and with a kitchen, her spirits would pick up.
Needless to say, the realization had never penetrated to Fat’s mind that
Sherri sought out this kind of abode. Her dingy surroundings came as a
result of her affliction, not as a cause; she could recreate these conditions
wherever she went—which Fat eventually discovered.
At this point in time, however, Fat had geared up his mental and physical
assembly line to turn out an endless series of good acts toward the person
who, before all other persons, had visited him in the cardiac intensive care
ward and later at North Ward. Sherri had official documents declaring her a
Christian. Twice a week she took communion and one day she would enter
a religious order. Also, she called her priest by his first name. You cannot
get any closer to piety than that.
A couple of times Fat had told Sherri about his encounter with God. This
hadn’t impressed her, since Sherri Solvig believed that one encounters God
only through channels. She herself has access to these channels, which is to
say her priest Larry.
Once Fat had read to Sherri from the Britannica about the “secrecy
theme” in Mark and Matthew, the idea that Christ veiled his teachings in
parable form so that the multitude—that is, the many outsiders—would not
understand him and so would not be saved. Christ, according to this view or
theme, intended salvation only for his little flock. The Britannica discussed
this up front.
“That’s bullshit,” Sherri said.
Fat said, “You mean this Britannica is wrong or the Bible is wrong? The
Britannica is just—”
“The Bible doesn’t say that,” Sherri said, who read the Bible all the time,
or at least had a copy of it always with her.
--- PAGE 79 ---
It took Fat hours to find the citation in Luke; finally he had it, to set
before Sherri:
“His disciples asked him what this parable might mean, and he said,
‘The mysteries of the kingdom of God are revealed to you, for the
rest there are only parables, so that they might see but not perceive,
listen but not understand.’”
(Luke 8:9/10)
“I’ll ask Larry if that’s one of the corrupt parts of the Bible,” Sherri said.
Pissed off, Fat said irritably, “Sherri, why don’t you cut out all the
sections of the Bible you agree with and paste them together? And not have
to deal with the rest.”
“Don’t be snippy,” Sherri said, who was hanging up clothes in her tiny
closet.
Nonetheless, Fat imagined that basically he and Sherri shared a common
bond. They both agreed that God existed; Christ had died to save man;
people who didn’t believe this didn’t know what was going on. He had
confided to her that he had seen God, news which Sherri received placidly
(at that moment she had been ironing).
“It’s called a theophany,” Fat said. “Or an epiphany.”
“An epiphany,” Sherri said, pacing her voice to the rate of her slow
ironing, “is a feast celebrated on January sixth, marking the baptism of
Christ. I always go. Why don’t you go? It’s a lovely service. You know, I
heard this joke—” She droned on. Hearing this, Fat was mystified. He
decided to change the subject; now Sherri had switched to an account of an
instance when Larry—who was Father Minter to Fat—had poured the
sacramental wine down the front of a kneeling female communicant’s low-
cut dress.
“Do you think John the Baptist was an Essene?” he asked Sherri.
Never at any time did Sherri Solvig admit she didn’t know the answer to
a theological question; the closest she came surfaced in the form of
responding, “I’ll ask Larry.” To Fat she now said calmly. “John the Baptist
was Elijah who returns before Christ comes. They asked Christ about that
and he said John the Baptist was Elijah who had been promised.”
“But was he an Essene.”
--- PAGE 80 ---
Pausing momentarily in her ironing, Sherri said, “Didn’t the Essenes live
in the Dead Sea?”
“Well, at the Qumran Wadi.”
“Didn’t your friend Bishop Pike die in the Dead Sea?”
Fat had known Jim Pike, a fact he always proudly narrated to people
given a pretext. “Yes,” he said. “Jim and his wife had driven out onto the
Dead Sea Desert in a Ford Cortina. They had two bottles of Coca-Cola with
them; that’s all.”
“You told me,” Sherri said, resuming her ironing.
“What I could never figure out,” Fat said, “is why they didn’t drink the
water in the car radiator. That’s what you do when your car breaks down in
the desert and you’re stranded.” For years Fat had brooded about Jim Pike’s
death. He imagined that it was somehow tied in with the murders of the
Kennedys and Dr. King, but he had no evidence whatsoever for it.
“Maybe they had anti-freeze in their radiator,” Sherri said.
“In the Dead Sea Desert?”
Sherri said, “My car has been giving me trouble, the man at the Exxon
station on Seventeenth says that the motor mounts are loose. Is that
serious?”
Not wanting to talk about Sherri’s beat-up old car but wanting instead to
rattle on about Jim Pike, Fat said, “I don’t know.” He tried to think how to
get the topic back to his friend’s perplexing death but could not.
“That damn car,” Sherri said.
“You didn’t pay anything for it; that guy gave it to you.”
“‘Didn’t pay anything’? He made me feel like he owned me for giving
me that damn car.”
“Remind me never to give you a car,” Fat said.
All the clues lay before him that day. If you did something for Sherri she
felt she should feel gratitude—which she did not—and this she interpreted
as a burden, a despised obligation. However, Fat had a ready rationalization
for this, which he had already begun to employ. He did not do things for
Sherri to get anything back; ergo, he did not expect gratitude. Ergo, if he
did not get it that was okay.
What he failed to notice was that not only was there no gratitude (which
he could psychologically handle) but downright malice showed itself
instead, Fat had noted this but had written it off as nothing more than
irritability, a form of impatience. He could not believe that someone would
--- PAGE 81 ---
return malice for assistance. Therefore he discounted the testimony of his
senses.
Once, when I lectured at the University of California at Fullerton, a
student asked me for a short, simple definition of reality. I thought it over
and answered, “Reality is that which when you stop believing in it, it
doesn’t go away.”
Fat did not believe that Sherri returned malice for assistance given her.
But that failure to believe changed nothing. Therefore her response lay
within the framework of what we call “reality.” Fat, whether he liked it or
not, would in some way have to deal with it, or else stop seeing Sherri
socially.
One of the reasons Beth left Fat stemmed from his visits to Sherri at her
rundown room in Santa Ana. Fat had deluded himself into believing that he
visited her out of charity. Actually he had become horny, due to the fact that
Beth had lost interest in him sexually and he was not, as they say, getting
any. In many ways Sherri struck him as pretty; in fact Sherri was pretty; we
all agreed. During her chemotherapy she wore a wig. David had been
fooled by the wig and often complimented her on her hair, which amused
her. We regarded this as macabre, on both their parts.
In his study of the form that masochism takes in modern man, Theodor
Reik puts forth an interesting view. Masochism is more widespread than we
realize because it takes an attenuated form. The basic dynamism is as
follows: a human being sees something bad which is coming as inevitable.
There is no way he can halt the process; he is helpless. This sense of
helplessness generates a need to gain some control over the impending pain
—any kind of control will do. This makes sense; the subjective feeling of
helplessness is more painful than the impending misery. So the person
seizes control over the situation in the only way open to him: he connives to
bring on the impending misery; he hastens it. This activity on his part
promotes the false impression that he enjoys pain. Not so. It is simply that
he cannot any longer endure the helplessness or the supposed helplessness.
But in the process of gaining control over the inevitable misery he becomes,
automatically, anhedonic (which means being unable or unwilling to enjoy
pleasure). Anhedonia sets in stealthily. Over the years it takes control of
him. For example, he learns to defer gratification; this is a step in the dismal
process of anhedonia. In learning to defer gratification he experiences a
sense of self-mastery; he has become stoic, disciplined; he does not give
--- PAGE 82 ---
way to impulse. He has control. Control over himself in terms of his
impulses and control over the external situation. He is a controlled and
controlling person. Pretty soon he has branched out and is controlling other
people, as part of the situation. He becomes a manipulator. Of course, he is
not consciously aware of this; all he intends to do is lessen his own sense of
impotence. But in his task of lessening this sense, he insidiously
overpowers the freedom of others. Yet, he derives no pleasure from this, no
positive psychological gain; all his gains are essentially negative.
Sherri Solvig had had cancer, lymphatic cancer, but due to valiant efforts
by her doctors she had gone into remission. However, encoded in the
memory-tapes of her brain was the datum that patients with lymphoma who
go into remission usually eventually lose their remission. They aren’t cured;
the ailment has somehow mysteriously passed from a palpable state into a
sort of metaphysical state, a limbo. It is there but it is not there. So despite
her current good health, Sherri (her mind told her) contained a ticking
clock, and when the clock chimed she would die. Nothing could be done
about it, except the frantic promotion of a second remission. But even if a
second remission were obtained, that remission, too, by the same logic, the
same inexorable process, would end.
Time had Sherri in its absolute power. Time contained one outcome for
her: terminal cancer. This is how her mind had factored the situation out; it
had come to this conclusion, and no matter how good she felt or what she
had going for her in her life, this fact remained a constant. A cancer patient
in remission, then, represents a stepped-up case of the status of all humans;
eventually you are going to die.
In the back of her mind, Sherri thought about death ceaselessly.
Everything else, all people, objects and processes had become reduced to
the status of shadows. Worse yet, when she contemplated other people she
contemplated the injustice of the universe. They did not have cancer. This
meant that, psychologically speaking, they were immortal. This was unfair.
Everyone had conspired to rob her of her youth, her happiness and
eventually her life; in place of those, everyone else had piled infinite pain
on her, and probably they secretly enjoyed it. “Enjoying themselves” and
“enjoying it” amounted to the same evil thing. Sherri, therefore, had
motivation for wishing that the whole world would go to hell in a
handbasket.
--- PAGE 83 ---
Of course, she did not say this aloud. But she lived it. Due to her cancer
she had become totally anhedonic. How can one deny the sense in this?
Logically, Sherri should have squeezed every moment of pleasure out of
life during her remission, but the mind does not function logically, as Fat
had figured out. Sherri spent her time anticipating the loss of her remission.
In this respect she did not postpone gratification; she enjoyed her
returning lymphoma now.
Fat couldn’t make this complex mental process out. He only saw a young
woman who had suffered a lot and who had been dealt a bum hand. He
reasoned that he could improve her life. That was a good thing to do. He
would love her, love himself and God would love the both of them. Fat saw
love, and Sherri saw impending pain and death over which she had no
control. There can be no meeting of such two different worlds.
In summary (as Fat would say), the modern-day masochist does not
enjoy pain; he simply can’t stand being helpless. “Enjoying pain” is a
semantic contradiction, as certain philosophers and psychologists have
pointed out. “Pain” is defined as something that you experience as
unpleasant. “Unpleasant” is defined as something you don’t want. Try to
define it otherwise and see where it gets you. “Enjoying pain” means
“enjoying what you find unpleasant.” Reik had the handle on the situation;
he decoded the true dynamism of modern attenuated masochism . . . and
saw it spread out among almost all of us, in one form or another and to
some degree. It has become an ubiquity.
One could not correctly accuse Sherri of enjoying cancer. Or even
wanting to have cancer. But she believed that cancer lay in the deck of cards
in front of her, buried somewhere in the pack; she turned one card over each
day, and each day cancer failed to show up. But if that card is in the pack
and you are turning the cards over one by one eventually you will turn the
cancer card over, and there it ends.
So, through no real fault of her own, Sherri was primed to fuck Fat over
as he had never been fucked over before. The difference between Gloria
Knudson and Sherri was obvious; Gloria wanted to die for strictly
imaginary reasons. Sherri would literally die whether she wanted to or not.
Gloria had the option to cease playing her malignant death-game any time
she psychologically wished, but Sherri did not. It was as if Gloria, upon
smashing herself to bits on the pavement below the Oakland Synanon
Building, had been reborn twice the size with twice the mental strength.
--- PAGE 84 ---
Meanwhile, Beth’s leaving with Christopher had whittled Horselover Fat
down to half his normal size. The odds did not favor a sanguine outcome.
The actual motivation in Fat’s head for feeling attracted to Sherri was the
locking-in onto death which had begun with Gloria. But, imagining that Dr.
Stone had cured him, Fat now sailed out into the world with renewed hope
—sailed unerringly into madness and death; he had learned nothing. True,
the bullet had been pulled from his body and the wound healed. But he was
primed for another, eager for another. He couldn’t wait to move in with
Sherri and save her.
If you’ll remember, helping people was one of the two basic things Fat
has been told long ago to give up; helping people and taking dope. He had
stopped taking dope, but all his energy and enthusiasm were now totally
channeled into saving people.
Better he had kept on with the dope.
--- PAGE 85 ---

--- PAGE 86 ---
6
THE MACHINERY OF divorce chewed Fat up into a single man, freeing him to
go forth and abolish himself. He could hardly wait.
Meanwhile he had entered therapy through the Orange County Mental
Health people. They had assigned him a therapist named Maurice. Maurice
was not your standard therapist. During the Sixties he had run guns and
dope into California, using the port of Long Beach; he had belonged to
SNCC and CORE and had fought as an Israeli commando against the
Syrians; Maurice stood six-foot-two inches high and his muscles bulged
under his shirt, nearly popping the buttons. Like Horselover Fat he had a
black, curly beard. Generally, he stood facing Fat across the room, not
sitting; he yelled at Fat, punctuating his admonitions with, “And I mean it.”
Fat never doubted that Maurice meant what he said; it wasn’t an issue.
The game plan on Maurice’s part had to do with bullying Fat into
enjoying life instead of saving people. Fat had no concept of enjoyment; he
understood only meaning. Initially, Maurice had him draw up a written list
of ten things he most wanted.
The term “wanted,” as in “wanted to do,” puzzled Fat.
“What I want to do,” he said, “is help Sherri. So she doesn’t get sick
again.”
Maurice roared, “You think you ought to help her. You think it makes you
a good person. Nothing will ever make you a good person. You have no
value to anyone.”
Feebly, Fat protested that that wasn’t so.
“You’re worthless,” Maurice said.
“And you’re full of shit,” Fat said, to which Maurice grinned. Maurice
had begun to get what he wanted.
“Listen to me,” Maurice said, “and I mean it. Go smoke dope and ball
some broad that’s got big tits, not one who’s dying. You know Sherri’s
dying; right? She’s going to die and then what’re you going to do? Go back
to Beth? Beth tried to kill you.”
“She did?” Fat said, amazed.
--- PAGE 87 ---
“Sure she did. She set you up to die. She knew you’d try to ice yourself if
she took your son and split.”
“Well,” Fat said, partly pleased; this meant he wasn’t paranoid, anyhow.
Underneath he knew that Beth had engineered his suicide attempt.
“When Sherri dies,” Maurice said, “you’re going to die. You want to die?
I can arrange it right now.” He examined his big wristwatch which showed
everything including the position of the stars. “Let’s see; it’s two-thirty.
What about six this evening?”
Fat couldn’t tell if Maurice were serious, but he believed that Maurice
possessed the capability, as the term goes.
“Listen,” Maurice said, “and I mean this. There are easier ways to die
than you’ve glommed onto. You’re doing it the hard way. What you’ve set
up is, Sherri dies and then you have another pretext to die. You don’t need a
pretext—your wife and son leaving you, Sherri croaking. That’ll be the big
pay-off when Sherri croaks. In your grief and love for her—”
“But who says Sherri is going to die?” Fat interrupted. He believed that
through his magical powers he could save her; this in fact underlay all his
strategy.
Maurice ignored the question. “Why do you want to die?” he said,
instead.
“I don’t,” Fat said, who honestly believed that he didn’t.
“If Sherri didn’t have cancer would you want to shack up with her?”
Maurice waited and got no answer, mainly because Fat had to admit to
himself that, no, he wouldn’t. “Why do you want to die?” Maurice repeated.
“Well,” Fat said, at a loss.
“Are you a bad person?”
“No,” Fat said.
“Is someone telling you to die? A voice? Someone flashing you ‘die’
messages?”
“No.”
“Did your mother want you to die?”
“Well, ever since Gloria—”
“Fuck Gloria. Who’s Gloria? You never even slept with her. You didn’t
even know her. You were already preparing to die. Don’t give me that shit.”
Maurice, as usual had begun to yell. “If you want to help people, go up to
L.A. and give them a hand at the Catholic Workers’ Soup Kitchen, or turn
as much of your money over to CARE as you possibly can. Let
--- PAGE 88 ---
professionals help people. You’re lying to yourself; you’re lying that Gloria
meant something to you, that what’s-her-name—Sherri—isn’t going to die
—of course she’s going to die! That’s why you’re shacking up with her, so
you can be there when she dies. She wants to pull you down with her and
you want her to; it’s a collusion between the two of you. Everybody who
comes in this door wants to die. That’s what mental illness is all about. You
didn’t know that? I’m telling you. I’d like to hold your head under water
until you fought to live. If you didn’t fight, then fuck it. I wish they’d let me
do it. Your friend who has cancer—she got it on purpose. Cancer represents
a deliberate failure of the immune system of the body; the person turns it
off. It’s because of loss, the loss of a loved one. See how death spreads out?
Everyone has cancer cells floating around in their bodies, but their immune
system takes care of it.”
“She did have a friend who died,” Fat admitted. “He had a grand mal
seizure. And her mother died of cancer.”
“So Sherri felt guilty because her friend died and her mother died. You
feel guilty because Gloria died. Take responsibility for your own life for a
change. It’s your job to protect yourself.”
Fat said, “It’s my job to help Sherri.”
“Let’s see your list. You better have that list.”
Handing over his list of the ten things he most wanted to do, Fat asked
himself silently if Maurice had all his marbles. Surely Sherri didn’t want to
die; she had put up a stubborn and brave fight; she had endured not only the
cancer but the chemotherapy.
“You want to walk on the beach at Santa Barbara,” Maurice said,
examining the list. “That’s number one.”
“Anything wrong with that?” Fat said, defensively.
“No. Well? Why don’t you do it?”
“Look at number two,” Fat said. “I have to have a pretty girl with me.”
Maurice said, “Take Sherri.”
“She—” He hesitated. He had, as a matter of fact, asked Sherri to go to
the beach with him, up to Santa Barbara to spend a weekend at one of the
luxurious beach hotels. She had answered that her church work kept her too
busy.
“She won’t go,” Maurice furnished for him. “She’s too busy. Doing
what?”
“Church.”
--- PAGE 89 ---
They looked at each other.
“Her life won’t differ much when her cancer returns,” Maurice said
finally. “Does she talk about her cancer?”
“Yes.”
“To clerks in stores? Everyone she meets?”
“Yes.”
“Okay, her life will differ; she’ll get more sympathy. She’ll be better off.”
With difficulty, Fat said, “One time she told me—” He could barely say
it. “That getting cancer was the best thing that ever happened to her.
Because then—”
“The Federal Government funded her.”
“Yes.” He nodded.
“So she’ll never have to work again. I presume she’s still drawing SSI
even though she’s in remission.”
“Yeah,” Fat said glumly.
“They’re going to catch up with her. They’ll check with her doctor. Then
she’ll have to get a job.”
Fat said, with bitterness, “She’ll never get a job.”
“You hate this girl,” Maurice said. “And worse, you don’t respect her.
She’s a girl bum. She’s a rip-off artist. She’s ripping you off, emotionally
and financially. You’re supporting her, right? And she also gets the SSI.
She’s got a racket, the cancer racket. And you’re the mark.” Maurice
regarded him sternly. “Do you believe in God?” he asked suddenly.
You can infer from this question that Fat had cooled his Godtalk during
his therapeutic sessions with Maurice. He did not intend to wind up in
North Ward again.
“In a sense,” Fat said. But he couldn’t let it lie there; he had to amplify. “I
have my own concept of God,” he said. “Based on my own—” He
hesitated, envisioning the trap built from his words; the trap bristled with
barbed wire. “Thoughts,” he finished.
“Is this a sensitive topic with you?” Maurice said.
Fat could not see what was coming, if anything. For example, he did not
have access to his North Ward files and he did not know if Maurice had
read them—or what they contained.
“No,” he said.
“Do you believe man is created in God’s image?” Maurice said.
“Yes,” Fat said.
--- PAGE 90 ---
Maurice, raising his voice, shouted, “Then isn’t it an offense against God
to ice yourself? Did you ever think of that?”
“I thought of that,” Fat said. “I thought of that a lot.”
“Well? And what did you decide? Let me tell you what it says in Genesis,
in case you’ve forgotten. ‘Then God said, “Let us make man in our image
and likeness to rule the fish in the sea, the birds of heaven, the cattle, all
—”’”
“Okay,” Fat broke in, “but that’s the creator deity, not the true God.”
“What?” Maurice said.
Fat said, “That’s Yaldaboath. Sometimes called Samael, the blind god.
He’s deranged.”
“What the hell are you talking about?” Maurice said.
“Yaldaboath is a monster spawned by Sophia who fell from the
Pleroma,” Fat said. “He imagines he’s the only god but he’s wrong. There’s
something the matter with him; he can’t see. He creates our world but
because he’s blind he botches the job. The real God sees down from far
above and in his pity sets to work to save us. Fragments of light from the
Pleroma are—”
Staring at him, Maurice said, “Who made up this stuff? You?”
“Basically,” Fat said, “my doctrine is Valentinian, second century C.E.”
“What’s ‘C.E.’?”
“Common Era. The designation replaces A.D. Valentinus’s Gnosticism is
the more subtle branch as opposed to the Iranian, which of course was
strongly influenced by Zoroastrianism dualism. Valentinus perceived the
ontological salvific value of the gnosis, since it reversed the original, primal
condition of ignorance, which represents the state of the fall, the
impairment of the Godhead which resulted in the botched creation of the
phenomenal or material world. The true God, who is totally transcendent,
did not create the world. However, seeing what Yaldaboath had done—”
“Who’s this ‘Yaldaboath’? Yahweh created the world! It says so in the
Bible!”
Fat said, “The creator deity imagined that he was the only god; that’s
why he was jealous and said, ‘You shall have no other gods before me,’ to
which—”
Maurice shouted, “Haven’t you read the Bible?”
After a pause, Fat tried another turn. He was dealing with a religious
idiot. “Look,” he said, as reasonably as possible. “A number of opinions
--- PAGE 91 ---
exist as to the creation of the world. For instance, if you regard the world as
artifact—which it may not be; it may be an organism, which is how the
ancient Greeks regarded it—you still can’t reason back to a creator; for
instance, there may have been a number of creators at several times. The
Buddhist idealists point this out. But even if—”
“You’ve never read the Bible,” Maurice said with incredulity. “You know
what I want you to do? And I mean this. I want you to go home and study
the Bible. I want you to read Genesis over twice; you hear me? Two times.
Carefully. And I want you to write an outline of the main ideas and events
in it, in descending order of importance. And when you show up here next
week I want to see that list.” He obviously was genuinely angry.
Bringing up the topic of God had been a poor idea, but of course Maurice
hadn’t known that in advance. All he intended to do was appeal to Fat’s
ethics. Being Jewish, Maurice assumed that religion and ethics couldn’t be
separated, since they are combined in the Hebrew monotheism. Ethics
devolve directly from Yahweh to Moses; everybody knows that. Everybody
but Horselover Fat, whose problem, at that moment, was that he knew too
much.
Breathing heavily, Maurice began going through his appointment book.
He hadn’t iced Syrian assassins by regarding the cosmos as a sentient
entelechy with psyche and soma, a macrocosmic mirror to man the
microcosm.
“Let me just say one thing,” Fat said.
Irritably, Maurice nodded.
“The creator deity,” Fat said, “may be insane and therefore the universe is
insane. What we experience as chaos is actually irrationality. There is a
difference.” He was silent, then.
“The universe is what you make of it,” Maurice said. “It’s what you do
with it that counts. It’s your responsibility to do something life-promoting
with it, not life-destructive.”
“That’s the existential position,” Fat said. “Based on the concept that We
are what we do, rather than, We are what we think. It finds its first
expression in Goethe’s Faust, Part One, where Faust says, ‘Im Anfang war
das Wort.’ He’s quoting the opening of the Fourth Gospel; ‘In the beginning
was the Word.’ Faust says, ‘Nein, Im Anfang war die Tat.’ ‘In the beginning
was the deed.’ From this, all existentialism comes.”
Maurice stared at him as if he were a bug.
--- PAGE 92 ---
Driving back to the modern two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment in
downtown Santa Ana, a full-security apartment with deadbolt lock in a
building with electric gate, underground parking, closed-circuit TV
scanning of the main entrance, where he lived with Sherri, Fat realized that
he had fallen from the status of authority back to the humble status of crank.
Maurice, in attempting to help him, had accidentally erased Fat’s bastion of
security.
However, on the good side, he now lived in this fortress-like, or jail-like,
full-security new building, set dead in the center of the Mexican barrio. You
needed a magnetic computer card to get the gate to the underground garage
to open. This shored up Fat’s marginal morale. Since their apartment was up
on the top floor he could literally look down on Santa Ana and all the
poorer people who got ripped off by drunks and junkies every hour of the
night. In addition, of much more importance, he had Sherri with him. She
cooked wonderful meals, although he had to do the dishes and the
shopping. Sherri did neither. She sewed and ironed a lot, drove off on
errands, talked on the telephone to her old girlfriends from high school and
kept Fat informed about church matters.
I can’t give the name of Sherri’s church because it really exists (well, so,
too, does Santa Ana), so I will call it what Sherri called it: Jesus’ sweatshop.
Half the day she manned the phones and the front desk; she had charge of
the help programs, which meant that she disbursed food, money for shelter,
advice on how to deal with Welfare and weeded the junkies out from the
real people.
Sherri detested junkies, and for good reason. They continually showed up
with a new scam every day. What annoyed her the most was not so much
their ripping off the church to score smack, but their boasting about it later.
However, since junkies have no loyalty to one another, junkies generally
showed up to tell her which other junkies were doing the ripping off and the
boasting. Sherri put their names down on her shit list. Customarily, she
arrived home from the church, raving like a madwoman about conditions
there, most especially what the creeps and junkies had said and done that
day, and how Larry, the priest, did nothing about it.
After a week of living together. Fat knew a great deal more about Sherri
than he had known from seeing her socially over the three years of their
friendship. Sherri resented every creature on earth, in order of proximity to
--- PAGE 93 ---
her; that is, the more she had to do with someone or something the more she
resented him, or her or it. The great erotic love in her life took the form of
the priest, Larry. During the bad days when she was literally dying from the
cancer, Sherri had told Larry that her great desire was to sleep with him, to
which Larry had said (this fascinated Fat, who did not regard it as an
appropriate answer) that he, Larry, never mixed his social life with his
business life (Larry was married, with three children and a grandchild).
Sherri still loved him and still wanted to go to bed with him, but she sensed
defeat.
On the positive side, one time while living at her sister’s—or conversely,
dying at her sister’s, to hear Sherri tell it—she had gone into seizures and
Father Larry had showed up to take her to the hospital. As he picked her up
in his arms she had kissed him and he had French-kissed her. Sherri
mentioned this several times to Fat. Wistfully, she longed for those days.
“I love you,” she informed Fat one night, “but it’s really Larry that I
really love because he saved me when I was sick.”
Fat soon developed the opinion that religion was a sideline at Sherri’s
church. Answering the phone and mailing out stuff took the center ring. A
number of nebulous people—who might as well be named Larry, Moe and
Curly, as far as Fat was concerned—haunted the church, holding down
salaries inevitably larger than Sherri’s and requiring less work. Sherri
wished death to all of them. She often spoke with relish about their
misfortunes, as for instance when their cars wouldn’t start or they got
speeding tickets or Father Larry expressed dissatisfaction toward them.
“Eddy’s going to get the royal boot,” Sherri would say, upon coming
home. “The little fucker.”
One particular indigent chronically provoked annoyance in Sherri, a man
named Jack Barbina who, Sherri said, rummaged through garbage cans to
find little gifts for her. Jack Barbina showed up when Sherri was alone in
the church office, handed her a soiled box of dates and a perplexing note
stressing his desire to court her. Sherri pegged him as a maniac the first day
she saw him; she lived in fear that he would murder her.
“I’m going to call you the next time he comes in,” she told Fat. “I’m not
going to be there alone with him. There isn’t enough money in the Bishop’s
Discretionary Fund to pay me for putting up with Jack Barbina, especially
on what they do pay me, which is about half what Eddy makes, the little
fairy.” To Sherri, the world was divided up among slackers, maniacs,
--- PAGE 94 ---
junkies, homosexuals and back-stabbing friends. She also had little use for
Mexicans and blacks. Fat used to wonder at her total lack of Christian
charity, in the emotional sense. How could—why would—Sherri want to
work in a church and fix her sights on religious orders when she resented,
feared and detested every living human being, and, most of all, complained
about her lot in life?
Sherri even resented her own sister, who had sheltered, fed and cared for
her all the time she was sick. The reason: Mae drove a Mercedes-Benz and
had a rich husband. But most of all Sherri resented the career of her best
friend Eleanor, who had become a nun.
“Here I am throwing up in Santa Ana,” Sherri frequently said, “and
Eleanor’s walking around in a habit in Las Vegas.”
“You’re not throwing up now,” Fat pointed out. “You’re in remission.”
“But she doesn’t know that. What kind of place is Las Vegas for a
religious order? She’s probably peddling her ass in—”
“You’re talking about a nun,” Fat said, who had met Eleanor; he had
liked her.
“I’d be a nun by now if I hadn’t got sick,” Sherri said.
To escape from Sherri’s nattering drivel, Fat shut himself up in the bedroom
he used as a study and began working once more on his great exegesis. He
had done almost 300,000 words, mostly holographically, but from the
inferior bulk he had begun to extract what he termed his Tractate:
Cryptica Scriptura (see Appendix p. 257), which simply means “hidden
discourse.” Fat found the Latin more impressive as a title.
At this point in the Meisterwerk he had begun patiently to fabricate his
cosmogony, which is the technical term for, “How the cosmos came into
existence.” Few individuals compose cosmogonies; usually entire cultures,
civilizations, people or tribes are required: a cosmogony is a group
production, evolving down through the ages. Fat well knew this, and prided
himself on having invented his own. He called it:
TWO SOURCE COSMOGONY
In his journal or exegesis it came as entry 47 and was by far the longest
single entry.
--- PAGE 95 ---
The One was and was-not, combined, and desired to separate the
was-not from the was. So it generated a diploid sac which contained,
like an eggshell, a pair of twins, each an androgyny, spinning in
opposite directions (the Yin and Yang of Taoism, with the One as the
Tao). The plan of the One was that both twins would emerge into being
(wasness) simultaneously; however, motivated by a desire to be (which
the One had implanted in both twins), the counter-clockwise twin broke
through the sac and separated prematurely; i.e., before full term. This
was the dark or Yin twin. Therefore it was defective. At full term the
wiser twin emerged. Each twin formed a unitary entelechy, a single
living organism made of psyche and soma, still rotating in opposite
directions to each other. The full term twin, called Form I by
Parmenides, advanced correctly through its growth stages, but the
prematurely born twin, called Form II, languished.
The next step in the One’s plan was that the Two would become the
Many, through their dialectic interaction. From them as
hyperuniverses they projected a hologram-like interface, which is the
pluriform universe we creatures inhabit. The two sources were to
intermingle equally in maintaining our universe, but Form II continued
to languish toward illness, madness and disorder. These aspects she
projected into our universe.
It was the One’s purpose for our hologramatic universe to serve as a
teaching instrument by which a variety of new lives advanced until
ultimately they would be isomorphic with the One. However, the
decaying condition of hyperuniverse II introduced malfactors which
damaged our hologramatic universe. This is the origin of entropy,
undeserved suffering, chaos and death, as well as the Empire, the Black
Iron Prison; in essence, the aborting of the proper health and growth of
the life forms within the hologramatic universe. Also the teaching
function was grossly impaired, since only the signal from the
hyperuniverse I was information-rich; that from II had become noise.
The psyche of hyperuniverse I sent a micro-form of itself into
hyperuniverse II to attempt to heal it. The micro-form was apparent in
our hologramatic universe as Jesus Christ. However, hyperuniverse II,
being deranged, at once tormented, humiliated, rejected and finally
killed the micro-form of the healing psyche of her healthy twin. After
that, hyperuniverse II continued to decay into blind, mechanical,
--- PAGE 96 ---
purposeless causal processes. It then became the task of Christ (more
properly the Holy Spirit) to either rescue the life forms in the
hologramatic universe, or abolish all influences on it emanating from
II. Approaching its task with caution, it prepared to kill the deranged
twin, since she cannot be healed; i.e., she will not allow herself to be
healed because she does not understand that she is sick. This illness and
madness pervades us and makes us idiots living in private, unreal
worlds. The original plan of the One can only be realized now by the
division of hyperuniverse I into two healthy hyperuniverses, which will
transform the hologramatic universe into the successful teaching
machine it was designed to be. We will experience this as the “Kingdom
of God.”
Within time, hyperuniverse II remains alive: “The Empire never
ended.” But in eternity, where the hyperuniverses exist, she has been
killed—of necessity—by the healthy twin of hyperuniverse I, who is our
champion. The One grieves for this death, since the One loved both
twins; therefore the information of the Mind consists of a tragic tale of
the death of a woman, the undertones of which generate anguish into
all the creatures of the hologramatic universe without their knowing
why. This grief will depart when the healthy twin undergoes mitosis
and the “Kingdom of God” arrives. The machinery for this
tranformation—the procession within time from the Age of Iron to the
Age of Gold—is at work now; in eternity it is already accomplished.
Not long thereafter, Sherri got fed up with Fat working night and day on
his exegesis; also she got mad because he asked her to contribute some of
her SSI money to pay the rent, since because of a court judgment he had to
pay out a lot of spousal and child support to Beth and Christopher. Having
found another apartment for which the Santa Ana housing authority would
pick up the tab, Sherri wound up living by herself rent-free, without the
obligation to fix Fat’s dinner; also she could go out with other men,
something Fat had objected to while he and Sherri were living together. To
this possessiveness, Sherri had said hotly one night, when she came home
from walking hand-in-hand with a male friend to find Fat furious:
“I don’t have to put up with this crap.”
Fat promised not to object to Sherri going out with other men any more,
nor would he continue to ask her to contribute toward the rent and food
--- PAGE 97 ---
costs, even though at the moment he had only nine dollars in his bank
account. This did no good; Sherri was pissed.
“I’m moving out,” she informed him.
After she moved out, Fat had to raise funds to purchase all manner of
furniture, dishes, TV set, flatware, towels—everything, because he had
brought little or nothing with him from his marriage; he had expected to
depend on Sherri’s chattels. Needless to say, he found life very lonely
without her; living by himself in the two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment
which they had shared depressed the hell out of him. His friends worried
about him and tried to cheer him up. In February Beth had left him and now
in early September Sherri had left him. He was again dying by inches. All
he did was sit at his typewriter or with notepad and pen, working on his
exegesis; nothing else remained in his life. Beth had moved up to
Sacramento, seven hundred miles away, so he did not get to see
Christopher. He thought about suicide, but not very much, he knew that
Maurice would not approve of such thoughts. Maurice would require of him
another list.
What really bothered Fat was the intuition that Sherri would soon lose
her remission. From going to class at Santa Ana College and working at the
church she became rundown and tired; every time he saw her, which was as
often as possible, he noticed how tired and thin she looked. In November
she complained of the flu; she had pains in her chest and coughed
continuously.
“This fucking flu,” Sherri said.
Finally he got her to go to her doctor for an X-ray and blood tests. He
knew she had lost her remission by then; she could barely drag herself
around.
The day she found out that she had cancer again, Fat was with her; since
her appointment with the doctor was at eight in the morning, Fat stayed up
the night before, just sitting. He drove her to the doctor, along with Edna, a
lifelong friend of Sherri’s; he and Edna sat together in the waiting room
while Sherri conferred with Dr. Applebaum.
“It’s just the flu,” Edna said.
Fat said nothing. He knew what it was. Three days before, he and Sherri
had walked to the grocery store; she could hardly put one foot before the
other. No doubt existed in Fat’s mind; as he sat with Edna in the crowded
--- PAGE 98 ---
waiting room terror filled him and he wanted to cry. Incredibly, today was
his birthday.
When Sherri emerged from Dr. Applebaum’s office, she had a Kleenex
pressed to her eyes; Fat and Edna ran over to her; he caught Sherri as she
fell saying, “It’s back, the cancer’s back.” She had it in the lymph nodes in
her neck and she had a malignant tumor in her right lung which was
suffocating her. Chemotherapy and radiation would be started in twenty-
four hours.
Edna said, stricken, “I was sure it was just flu. I wanted her to go to
Melodyland and testify that Jesus had cured her.”
To that remark, Fat said nothing.
The argument can be made that at this point Fat no longer had any moral
obligation to Sherri. For the most meager reason she had moved out on him,
leaving him alone, grieving and desperate, with nothing to do but scribble
away at his exegesis. Fat’s friends had all pointed this out. Even Edna
pointed this out, when Sherri wasn’t present in the same room. But Fat still
loved her. He now asked her to move back in with him so that he could take
care of her, inasmuch as she had become too weak to fix herself meals, and
once she began the chemotherapy she would become a lot sicker.
“No thanks,” Sherri said, tonelessly.
Fat walked down to her church one day and talked with Father Larry; he
begged Larry to put pressure on the State of California Medicare people to
provide someone to come in and fix meals for Sherri and to help clean up
her apartment, since she would not let him, Fat, do it. Father Larry said he
would, but nothing came of it. Again Fat went over to talk to the priest
about what could be done to help Sherri, and while he was talking, Fat
suddenly began to cry.
To this, Father Larry said enigmatically, “I’ve cried all the tears I am
going to cry for that girl.”
Fat could not tell if that meant that Larry had burned out his circuits from
grief or that he had calculatedly, as a self-protective device, curtailed his
grief. Fat does not know to this day. His own grief had reached critical
mass. Now Sherri had been hospitalized; Fat visited her and saw lying in
the bed a small sad shape, half the size he was accustomed to, a shape
coughing in pain, with wretched hopelessness in its eyes. Fat could not
drive home after that, so Kevin drove him home. Kevin, who usually
maintained his stance of cynicism, could not speak from grief; the two of
--- PAGE 99 ---
them drove along and then Kevin slapped him on the shoulder, which is the
only avenue open to men to show love for each other.
“What am I going to do?” Fat said, meaning, What am I going to do
when she dies?
He really loved Sherri, despite her treatment of him—if indeed, as his
friends maintained, she had treated him shabbily. He himself—he neither
knew nor cared about that. All he knew was that she lay in the hospital bed
with metastasized tumors throughout her. Every day he visited her in the
hospital, along with everyone else who knew her.
At night he did the only act left open to him: work on his exegesis. He
had reached an important entry.
Entry 48. ON OUR NATURE. It is proper to say: we appear to be
memory coils (DNA carriers capable of experience) in a computer-like
thinking system which, although we have correctly recorded and stored
thousands of years of experiential information, and each of us possesses
somewhat different deposits from all the other life forms, there is a
malfunction—a failure—of memory retrieval. There lies the trouble in
our particular subcircuit. “Salvation” through gnosis—more properly
anamnesis (the loss of amnesia)—although it has individual significance
for each of us—a quantum leap in perception, identity, cognition,
understanding, world- and self-experience, including immortality—it
has greater and further importance for the system as a whole,
inasmuch as these memories are data needed by it and valuable to it, to
its overall functioning.
Therefore it is in the process of self-repair, which includes:
rebuilding our subcircuit via linear and orthogonal time changes, as
well as continual signaling to us to stimulate blocked memory banks
within us to fire and hence retrieve what is there.
The external information or gnosis, then, consists of disinhibiting
instructions, with the core content actually intrinsic to us—that is,
already there (first observed by Plato; viz: that learning is a form of
remembering).
The ancients possessed techniques (sacraments and rituals) used
largely in the Greco-Roman mystery religions, including early
Christianity, to induce firing and retrieval, mainly with a sense of
restorative value to the individuals; the Gnostics, however, correctly
--- PAGE 100 ---
saw the ontological value to what they called the Godhead Itself, the
total entity.
The Godhead is impaired; some primordial crisis occurred in it
which we do not understand.
Fat reworked journal entry 29 and added it to his ON OUR NATURE
entry:
29. We did not fall because of a moral error; we fell because of an
intellectual error: that of taking the phenomenal world as real.
Therefore we are morally innocent. It is the Empire in its various
disguised polyforms which tells us we have sinned. “The Empire never
ended.”
By now Fat’s mind was going totally. All he did was work on his
exegesis or his tractate or just listen to his stereo or visit Sherri in the
hospital. He began to install entries in the tractate without logical order or
reason.
30. The phenomenal world does not exist; it is a hypostasis of the
information processed by the Mind.
27. If the centuries of spurious time are excised, the true date is not
1978 C.E. but 103 C.E. Therefore the New Testament says that the
Kingdom of the Spirit will come before “some now living die.” We are
living, therefore, in apostolic times
20. The Hermetic alchemists knew of the secret race of three-eyed
invaders but despite their efforts could not contact them, therefore
their efforts to support Frederick V, Elector Palatine, King of Bohemia,
failed. “The Empire never ended.”
21. The Rose Cross Brotherhood wrote, “Ex Deo nascimur, in Jesu
mortimur, per spiritum sanctum reviviscimus,” which is to say, “From
God we are born, in Jesus we die, by the Holy Spirit we live again.”
This signifies that they had rediscov-ered the lost formula for
immortality which the Empire had destroyed. “The Empire never
ended.”
10. Apollonius of Tyana, writing as Hermes Trismegistos, said, “That
which is above is that which is below.” By this he meant to tell us that